# List item 1 ------------------------------


1. BMC Public Health. 2021 Jul 5;21(1):1315. doi: 10.1186/s12889-021-11374-8.

Previous life experiences and social relations affecting individuals wish for
support when establishing healthy habits - a qualitative study of Norwegian
Healthy Life Centre participants.

Gjertsen TI(1), Helvik AS(2)(3), Følling IS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
thea.gjertsen@outlook.com.
(2)General Practice Research unit, Department of Public Health and Nursing,
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway.
(3)Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Ageing and Health, Vestfold Health Trust, 
Tønsberg, Norway.
(4)Centre for Obesity Research and innovation (ObeCe), St. Olavs University
Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Interventions to reduce and prevent overweight, obesity and T2D has
been advocated worldwide. In Norway, Healthy Life Centres have been established
to help individuals to reduce and prevent diseases, offering physical activity
and dietary advice to establish healthy habits. Previous life experiences, social
support and help from health personnel could play a role in the process of
establishing healthy habits. The aim of this study was to explore how two groups 
of Healthy Life Centre participants described their previous life experiences,
social relations and wish for support from Healthy Life Centre personnel.
METHODS: A qualitative design was used, including 49 individual semi-structured
interviews. The interviews for this study were performed in two different
samples, one sample of participants applying for HLC participation in 2013
(n = 23) and one sample of participants invited to HLC participation in 2015
(n = 26). The data was analyzed using systematic text condensation.
RESULTS: Three main themes in a chronological (past, present and future) order
were identified: 1. Previous life experiences stamping life situation (past
time). 2. Social relations being a support or a burden in everyday life (present 
time) and 3. Expressing wishes for HLC support (future).
CONCLUSIONS: In the process of establishing healthy habits, the need for help
from personnel may be differentiated based on previous life experiences and
present social relations.

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-021-11374-8 
PMID: 34225666 


2. Acta Neurol Scand. 2021 Jul 5. doi: 10.1111/ane.13498. [Epub ahead of print]

Sense of Coherence in partners to persons with Huntington's disease.

Karlstedt M(1), Winnberg U(2), Winnberg E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Health Care Sciences, Ersta Sköndal Bräcke University College,
Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: Huntington's disease (HD) is a progressive neuropsychiatric disease
characterized by involuntary movements and behavioural symptoms. This study aimed
to explore the association between the level of Sense of Coherence (SOC) and
health problems, and psychological distress factors in partners to HD affected
persons and their need of support.
MATERIALS & METHODS: A cross-sectional, descriptive, correlational design was
used. Data was generated from 94 HD partners from almost all networks, outpatient
clinics and nursing homes specialized in HD across Sweden. HD partners filled out
questionnaires with scales measuring SOC, health problems, psychological distress
factors and the Total Functional Capacity Scale (TFC). Non-parametric analysis
was used to analyse group differences.
RESULTS: Huntington's disease partners with a lower level of SOC experienced more
health problems than those with a higher level. Health problems among HD partners
were most common among HD affected in TFC stage 3, indicating that the partners
need most support during this period. Lower level of SOC was associated with
loneliness in the relationship; less possibilities to socialize with friends;
worries about the future as well as being subjected to physical aggression. The
experience of physical aggression from the HD affected person was common (44.7%) 
and 28.6% of the partners expressed worries about being subjected to physical
aggression.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that knowledge about the partners' SOC score may
be a helpful indicator identifying HD partners who are more vulnerable and need
additional help caring for the person with HD and can be a complementary tool in 
assessment protocols.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ane.13498 
PMID: 34224135 


3. Health Promot Int. 2021 Jul 2. pii: daab070. doi: 10.1093/heapro/daab070. [Epub
ahead of print]

University students' sense of coherence, future worries and mental health:
findings from the German COVID-HL-survey.

Dadaczynski K(1)(2), Okan O(3), Messer M(4), Rathmann K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing and Health Science, Fulda University of Applied
Sciences, Germany.
(2)Centre for Applied Health Science, Leuphana University, Lueneburg, Germany.
(3)Interdisciplinary Centre for Health Literacy Research, Bielefeld University,
Germany.
(4)Nursing Science with focus on Clinical Nursing across the Lifespan, Trier
University, Germany.

Early-on in the COVID-19 pandemic when universities were closed as part of the
nation-wide public health response to the COVID-19 outbreak, studying and student
life significantly changed. Based on limited evidence the aim of this study was
to explore the relationship between sense of coherence (SoC), future worries and 
mental health outcomes among German university students during the early phase of
the pandemic. A cross-sectional online survey with n = 14 916 participants was
carried out by inviting all private and public universities in Germany. All data 
were analysed using univariate, bivariate and multivariate statistics. Findings
indicate a low and very low wellbeing for 38% of university students. Moreover,
29% reported being affected by at least two health complaints more than once
week. Both health outcomes follow a social gradient and could be more frequently 
observed for respondents with lower subjective social status and female students.
Regression analysis revealed significant association between the SoC dimensions
and wellbeing (OR: 1.2-2.03) as well as health complaints (OR: 1.58-1.71). A high
level of future worries was associated with low/very low wellbeing (OR: 2.83) and
multiple health complaints (OR: 2.84). Based on the results, the public health
response to the pandemic and university health promotion should therefore
consider student mental health as an important target within their policy and
action frameworks.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/daab070 
PMID: 34214156 


4. Health Care Women Int. 2021 Jul 2:1-24. doi: 10.1080/07399332.2021.1932897. [Epub
ahead of print]

Older women and wellbeing through the pandemic: Examining the effect of daily
online yoga lessons.

Pandya SP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

The researcher reports the impact of online yoga lessons on a cohort of
community-dwelling older adult women in mitigating fears, anxieties and promoting
resilience, wellbeing and salutogenic wellness during the pandemic as compared to
a control group. Online yoga lessons were effective and economic class,
education, religion, marital status, and living arrangements were significant
moderators. Intervention adherence had the strongest predictor effects. The
combined effects of significant predictors were robust and latent class analyses 
indicated middle class, above threshold (>50%) lessons attendees and
self-practice doers, single, living in nonstandard families, college educated,
and Hindus, were likely to gain most.

DOI: 10.1080/07399332.2021.1932897 
PMID: 34213396 


5. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Jun 29;21(13). pii: 4460. doi: 10.3390/s21134460.

On the Optimal Field Sensing in Near-Field Characterization.

Capozzoli A(1), Curcio C(1), Liseno A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica e delle Tecnologie dell'Informazione,
Universitá di Napoli Federico II, via Claudio 21, 80125 Napoli, Italy.

We deal with the problem of characterizing a source or scatterer from
electromagnetic radiated or scattered field measurements. The problem refers to
the amplitude and phase measurements which has applications also to
interferometric approaches at optical frequencies. From low frequencies
(microwaves) to high frequencies or optics, application examples are
near-field/far-field transformations, object restoration from measurements within
a pupil, near-field THz imaging, optical coherence tomography and ptychography.
When analyzing the transmitting-sensing system, we can define "optimal virtual"
sensors by using the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) approach which has been, 
since long time, recognized as the "optimal" tool to manage linear algebraic
problems. The problem however emerges of discretizing the relevant singular
functions, thus defining the field sampling. To this end, we have recently
developed an approach based on the Singular Value Optimization (SVO) technique.
To make the "virtual" sensors physically realizable, in this paper, two
approaches are considered: casting the "virtual" field sensors into arrays
reaching the same performance of the "virtual" ones; operating a segmentation of 
the receiver. Concerning the array case, two ways are followed: synthesize the
array by a generalized Gaussian quadrature discretizing the linear reception
functionals and use elementary sensors according to SVO. We show that SVO is
"optimal" in the sense that it leads to the use of elementary, non-uniformly
located field sensors having the same performance of the "virtual" sensors and
that generalized Gaussian quadrature has essentially the same performance.

DOI: 10.3390/s21134460 
PMID: 34209975 


6. Healthcare (Basel). 2021 Jun 19;9(6). pii: 766. doi: 10.3390/healthcare9060766.

A Salutogenic Perspective on End-of-Life Care among the Indigenous Sámi of
Northern Fennoscandia.

Kroik L(1)(2), Tishelman C(3)(4), Stoor K(5)(6), Edin-Liljegren A(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Umeå University, 901 87 Umeå, Sweden.
(2)The Center for Rural Medicine, Region Västerbotten, 923 31 Storuman, Sweden.
(3)LIME/Division of Innovative Care Research, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77
Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Stockholm Health Care Services, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Language Studies, Umeå University, 901 87 Umeå, Sweden.
(6)Centre for Sámi Studies-Várdduo, Umeå University, 907 87 Umeå, Sweden.

There is limited empirical data about both health and end-of-life (EoL) issues
among the Indigenous Sámi of Fennoscandia. We therefore aimed to investigate
experiences of EoL care and support among the Sámi, both from the Sámi community 
itself as well as from more formalized health and social care services in Sweden.
Our primary data source is from focus group discussions (FGDs) held at a Sámi
event in 2017 with 24 people, complemented with analysis of previously collected 
data from 15 individual interviews with both Sámi and non-Sámi informants
familiar with dying, death and bereavement among Sámi; "go-along" discussions
with 12 Sámi, and individual interviews with 31 Sámi about advance care planning.
After initial framework analysis, we applied a salutogenic model for
interpretation, focusing on a sense of community coherence. We found a range of
generalized resistance resources in relation to the Sámi community, which
appeared to support EoL care situations, i.e., Social Organization; Familiarity
with EoL Care, Collective Cultural Heritage; Expressions of Spirituality; Support
from Majority Care Systems; and Brokerage. These positive features appear to
support key components of a sense of community coherence, i.e.,
comprehensibility, meaningfulness and manageability. We also found relatively
few, but notable deficits that may diminish the sense of community coherence,
i.e., lack of communication in one's own language; orientation, familiarity
and/or agreement in contacts with formal health and social care systems; and/or
support from extended family. The results suggest that there is a robust basis
among Sámi for well-functioning EoL care; a challenge is in developing supportive
interactions with the majority health and social care systems that support and
complement these structures, for partnership in developing care that is
meaningful, comprehensible and manageable even in potentially difficult EoL
situations.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare9060766 
PMCID: PMC8234930
PMID: 34205402 


7. J Clin Med. 2021 Jun 28;10(13). pii: 2852. doi: 10.3390/jcm10132852.

Angioedema Coexisting Chronic Spontaneous Urticaria Negatively Influences
Patients' Sense of Coherence, What Results in Susceptibility to Anxiety Symptoms 
Occurrence.

Badura-Brzoza K(1), Brzoza Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry in Tarnowskie Gory, Faculty of Medical Sciences in
Zabrze, Medical University of Silesia in Katowice, 42-612 Tarnowskie Gory,
Poland.
(2)Department of Internal Diseases with Division of Allergology, Institute of
Medical Sciences, University of Opole, Al. W. Witosa 26, 45-401 Opole, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Angioedema coexisting chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU) is proved
to result in patient anxiety occurrence, but the mechanisms and susceptibility
patterns are unknown. Sense of coherence (SOC) is one of methods of coping with
stress and is defined as a person's general orientation toward life. We decided
to assess SOC disturbances in CSU patients in the context of possible angioedema 
association.
METHODS: The study comprised 71 CSU subjects. To analyze disease activity, the
Urticaria Activity Score seven-day assessment questionnaire (UAS7) was used. For 
anxiety assessment, the STAI questionnaire was used. The SOC-29 questionnaire,
consisting of questions related to comprehensibility (SOC-C), manageability
(SOC-M), and meaningfulness (SOC-Mf), was used to analyze SOC parameters (SOC-T).
RESULTS: In patients with coexisting angioedema, we observed statistically
significantly lower values of SOC-Mf and SOC-T in comparison to the wheals only
group. In the angioedema group, we noticed significant negative correlations
between SOC-M and SOC-Mf, as well as SOC-T values and anxiety. In the wheals only
group, we proved statistically significant correlations between SOC-Mf and SOC-T 
and anxiety assessed as a state.
CONCLUSIONS: It is necessary to identify CSU patients manifesting angioedema as
they are more likely to have impaired SOC. Lower SOC in this specific group of
patients can be related to anxiety symptoms occurrence and should probably be an 
indication for psychological support.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm10132852 
PMID: 34203132 


8. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Jun 25;18(13). pii: 6852. doi:
10.3390/ijerph18136852.

Learn, Have Fun and Be Healthy! An Interview Study of Swedish Teenagers' Views of
Participation in Club Sport.

Jakobsson BT(1), Lundvall S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Swedish School of Sport and Health Sciences (GIH), 114 86 Stockholm,
Sweden.
(2)Department of Food and Nutrition, and Sport Science, University of Gothenburg,
411 20 Gothenburg, Sweden.

In Sweden, participation in club sport is a vital part of many children's lives. 
Despite this, many stop in their teenage years, raising questions concerning if
and in what ways club sport can provide health-promoting activities via longer,
sustained participation. The aim of this cross-sectional study is to explore and 
discuss young people's views of club sport from a health-promoting perspective.
The analysis draws on three sets of qualitative data: results from focus groups
interviews conducted in 2007 (n = 14) and in 2016 (n = 8) as well as 18 in-depth 
interviews conducted 2008. Antonovsy's salutogenic theory and his sense of
coherence (SOC) model inspired the analysis. Teenagers want to be a part of club 
sport because of a sense of enjoyment, learning, belonging and feeling healthy.
Teenagers stop when sport becomes too serious, non-flexible, time-consuming and
too competitive. The urge for flexibility and possibilities to make individual
decisions were emphasised in 2016. The organisation of club sport, it seems, has 
not adapted to changes in society and a generation of teenagers' health
interests. Club sport has the potential to be a health-promoting arena, but the
focus should be on changing the club sport environment, instead of a focus on
changing young people.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18136852 
PMID: 34202387 


9. J Clin Med. 2021 Jun 27;10(13). pii: 2841. doi: 10.3390/jcm10132841.

The Value of Anterior Segment Optical Coherence Tomography in Different Types of 
Corneal Infections: An Update.

Abdelghany AA(1), D'Oria F(2), Alio Del Barrio J(3), Alio JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Minia University, Minia 61519, 
Egypt.
(2)Section of Ophthalmology, Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Neurosciences 
and Sense Organs, University of Bari, 70124 Bari, Italy.
(3)Vissum Miranza, Miguel Hernandez University, c/Cabañal, 1, 03016 Alicante,
Spain.

Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (AS-OCT) is a modality that uses
low-coherence interferometry to visualize and assess anterior segment ocular
features, offering several advantages of being a sterile and noncontact modality 
that generates high-resolution cross-sectional images of the tissues. The
qualitative and quantitative information provided by AS-OCT may be extremely
useful for the clinician in the assessment of a wide spectrum of corneal
infections, guiding in the management and follow-up of these patients. In
clinical practice, infections are routinely evaluated with slit-lamp
biomicroscopy, an examination and imaging modality that is limited by the
physical characteristics of light. As a consequence, the depth of pathology and
the eventually associated corneal edema cannot be accurately measured with the
slit-lamp. Therefore, it represents a limit for the clinician, as in vivo
information about corneal diseases and the response to treatment is limited.
Resolution of corneal infection is characterized by an early reduction in corneal
edema, followed by a later reduction in infiltration: both parameters can be
routinely measured with standardized serial images by AS-OCT.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm10132841 
PMID: 34199039 


10. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2021 Jul 1;62(9):1. doi: 10.1167/iovs.62.9.1.

Spectrum of Disease Severity in Nonsyndromic Patients With Mutations in the
CEP290 Gene: A Multicentric Longitudinal Study.

Testa F(1), Sodi A(2), Signorini S(3), Di Iorio V(1), Murro V(2), Brunetti-Pierri
R(1), Valente EM(4)(5), Karali M(1)(6), Melillo P(1), Banfi S(6)(7), Simonelli
F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eye Clinic, Multidisciplinary Department of Medical, Surgical and Dental
Sciences, Università degli Studi della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples,
Italy.
(2)Eye Clinic, Neuromuscolar and Sense Organs Department, Careggi University
Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(3)Unit of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, IRCCS C. Mondino Foundation, Pavia,
Italy.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(5)Neurogenetics Unit, IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy.
(6)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy.
(7)Medical Genetics, Department of Precision Medicine, Università degli Studi
della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.

Purpose: The purpose of this study was to perform a detailed longitudinal
phenotyping and genetic characterization of 32 Italian patients with a
nonsyndromic retinal dystrophy and mutations in the CEP290 gene.
Methods: We reviewed the clinical history and examinations of 32 patients with a 
nonsyndromic retinal dystrophy due to mutations in the CEP290 gene, followed up
(mean follow-up: 5.9 years) at 3 Italian centers. The clinical examinations
included: best corrected visual acuity (BCVA), optical coherence tomography
(OCT), and full-field electroretinogram (ERG).
Results: Patients (mean age = 19.0 ± 3.4 years) had a mean BCVA of 1.73 ± 0.20
logMAR. Longitudinal analysis of BCVA showed a nonsignificant decline. Central
retinal thickness (CRT) declined significantly with age at an exponential rate of
1.0%/year (P = 0.001). At disease onset, most patients (19/32; 49.4%) had
nystagmus. The absence of nystagmus was significantly associated with better BCVA
and more preserved CRT (P < 0.05). ERG showed undetectable responses in most
patients (64.0%), whereas reduced scotopic and photopic responses were observed
in four patients (16.0%) who had no nystagmus. We identified 35 different
variants, among which 12 were novel. Our genotype-phenotype correlation analysis 
shows a significantly worse BCVA in patients harboring a loss-of-function
mutation and the deep-intronic variant c.2991+1655A>G.
Conclusions: Our study highlights a mild phenotype of the disease, characterized 
by absence of nystagmus, good visual acuity, considerably preserved retinal
morphology, and recordable ERG, confirming the wide spectrum of CEP290-related
retinal dystrophies. Finally, in our cohort, the deep intronic variant
c.2991+1655A>G was associated with a more severe phenotype.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.62.9.1 
PMID: 34196655 


11. Iran J Public Health. 2020 Dec;49(12):2384-2391. doi: 10.18502/ijph.v49i12.4823.

The Correlation and Influencing Factors of Crisis Response Ability and
Psychological Factors in Patients with Liver Cirrhosis.

Ji Y(1), Ding Q(2), Li T(3), Tang R(2), Zhang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin 150001, P.R. China.
(2)Operating Room, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University,
Harbin 150070, P.R. China.
(3)Ward II, Department of Orthopedics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin
Medical University, Harbin 150001, P.R. China.

Background: Illness can provoke a crisis response that affects condition
acceptance, treatment and recovery. Patients' sense of coherence can influence
this explored across patient cohorts internationally. However, few studies
examine these effects in patients with hepatic cirrhosis. This study investigated
sense of coherence and social support of patients with hepatic cirrhosis.
Methods: The psychological status of 146 patients admitted to the Digestive
System Department, First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University,
Harbin, China from Mar 2016 to Mar 2019 with hepatic cirrhosis was assessed using
the Sense of Coherence (SOC-13), Social Support Rating Scale (SSRS) and crisis
assessment scales.
Results: There was a low level of crisis response in patients with hepatic
cirrhosis that was influenced by age, disease course, education level and
Child-Pugh grade and negatively correlated with sense of coherence and social
support.
Conclusion: Liver cirrhosis patients had a low level of crisis response. As the
level of crisis response in is correlated with patients' sense of coherence,
social support and educational level, careful assessment, tailored educational
interventions and mobilizing of family support are important to maximize
responses to illness and thus improve quality of life.

Copyright © 2020 Ji et al. Published by Tehran University of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.18502/ijph.v49i12.4823 
PMCID: PMC8215054
PMID: 34178745 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
there is no conflict of interest.


12. Front Psychol. 2021 Jun 7;12:673706. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.673706. eCollection 
2021.

Repetition and Aesthetic Judgment in Post-tonal Music for Large Ensemble and
Orchestra.

Touizrar M(1), Knoll AL(2), Siedenburg K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Finnish Centre for Interdisciplinary Music Research, Department of Music, Art 
and Culture Studies, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland.
(2)Department of Medical Physics and Acoustics, Carl von Ossietzky University of 
Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.

Post-tonal music often poses perceptual and cognitive challenges for listeners,
potentially related to the use of relatively uncommon and unfamiliar musical
material and compositional processes. As a basic compositional device, repetition
affects memory for music and is structured by composers in very different ways
across tonal and post-tonal musical repertoires. Of particular concern is whether
post-tonal music exhibits mnemonic affordances that allow listeners to experience
a sense of global coherence, and whether repetition correlates strongly with
aesthetic judgment. Although previous research suggests that repetition impacts
aesthetic preference, empirical research has not mapped out the relationship
between repetition and aesthetic judgments across a broad set of post-tonal
music. Presenting 14 excerpts, grouped into three categories: tonal, modernist,
and post-1970, we observed that indications of repetitions in the music for a
group of 60 listeners, with and without musical training, showed significant
periods of interindividual synchronization. Aesthetic judgments were assessed by 
means of ratings for the following parameters: familiarity with the piece,
confidence of repetition responses, judgments of affordances for easy listening, 
coherence, similarity of moments, and recognition, as well as listeners' liking
and interest. A principal component analysis (PCA) on the joint question data and
the repetition responses suggested that two factors account for 92% of variance
in the data. These factors were interpreted as dominated by aesthetic judgment
and repetition strength. Linear mixed-effects regression indicated that
repetition strength generally differed across excerpt category, with modernist
excerpts featuring lower repetition strength compared to both post-1970 and tonal
excerpts. Aesthetic preference, on the other hand, was lower for excerpts in both
the modernist and post-1970 categories when compared to tonal excerpts. The
analysis did not reveal difference in response behavior for repetition responses 
as a function of musical training, though it indicated higher preference of
modernist excerpts with increasing levels of musical training. Overall, the
results suggest that the two factors, aesthetic judgment and repetition strength,
act as independent determinants in the experience of post-tonal music.

Copyright © 2021 Touizrar, Knoll and Siedenburg.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.673706 
PMCID: PMC8215669
PMID: 34163411 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


13. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes. 2021 Jun 16;14:2701-2715. doi: 10.2147/DMSO.S308322.
eCollection 2021.

Psychosocial Determinants of Treatment Adherence in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes
- A Review.

Świątoniowska-Lonc N(1), Tański W(2), Polański J(3), Jankowska-Polańska B(1),
Mazur G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Nursing, Wroclaw Medical University, Wrocław, Poland.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, 4th Military Teaching Hospital, Wrocław,
Poland.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Occupational Diseases and Hypertension,
Wroclaw Medical University, Wrocław, Poland.

Less than 50% of patients with diabetes achieve the glycaemic goals recommended
by the American Diabetes Association. The set of factors associated with
adherence to treatment is very broad. Evidence suggests that psychosocial factors
are related to medication adherence of patients with type 2 diabetes. Due to the 
lack of a clear statement from researchers regarding the relationship of
psychosocial factors to adherence, an electronic search was conducted in PubMed, 
MEDLINE, Academic Search Ultimate, CINAHL Complete, Edition and Health Source:
Nursing/Academic Edition using the following keywords "adherence", "diabetes",
"social support", "stress", "anxiety and depression", "beliefs about medicine",
"communication", "older age", "frailty", "cognitive impairment", "addiction",
"acceptance of illness", "sense of coherence" obtaining 2758 results. After a
narrowing of searches and reference scanning, 36 studies were qualified. The
studies analysed showed negative effects of anxiety, diabetes distress, older
age, poor communication with physicians, stress, concerns about medicines and
cognitive impairment on levels of self-care and medication adherence. One study
did not confirm the association of depression with adherence. Self-efficacy,
social and family support, and acceptance of illness had a beneficial effect on
medication adherence. In conclusion, the current evidence suggests that the
relationship between psychosocial factors and adherence has reliable scientific
support.

© 2021 Świątoniowska-Lonc et al.

DOI: 10.2147/DMSO.S308322 
PMCID: PMC8215904
PMID: 34163198 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no conflict of interest for 
this work.


14. J Med Ethics. 2021 Jun 23. pii: medethics-2020-107171. doi:
10.1136/medethics-2020-107171. [Epub ahead of print]

Intimacy for older adults in long-term care: a need, a right, a privilege-or a
kind of care?

Schouten V(1), Henrickson M(2), Cook CM(3), McDonald S(4), Atefi N(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Humanities, Media and Communication, Massey University, Palmerston
North, New Zealand v.schouten@massey.ac.nz.
(2)School of Social Work, Massey University-Albany Campus, Auckland, New Zealand.
(3)School of Clinical Sciences, Auckland University of Technology, Auckland, New 
Zealand.
(4)Ngāti Whātua and Ngāti Wai, Kaipara, New Zealand.

BACKGROUND: To investigate attitudes of staff, residents and family members in
long-term care towards sex and intimacy among older adults, specifically the
extent to which they conceptualise sex and intimacy as a need, a right, a
privilege or as a component of overall well-being.
METHODS: The present study was a part of a two-arm mixed-methods cross-sectional 
study using a concurrent triangulation design. A validated survey tool was
developed; 433 staff surveys were collected from 35 facilities across the
country. Interviews were conducted with 75 staff, residents and family members.
RESULTS: It was common for staff, residents and family members to talk about
intimacy and sexuality in terms of rights and needs. As well as using the
language of needs and rights, it was common for participants to use terms related
to well-being, such as fun, happiness or being miserable. One participant in
particular (a staff member) described receiving intimate touch as a 'kind of
care'-a particularly useful way of framing the conversation.
CONCLUSION: While staff, residents and family frequently used the familiar
language of needs and rights to discuss access to intimate touch, they also used 
the language of well-being and care. Reframing the conversation in this way
serves a useful purpose: it shifts the focus from simply meeting minimum
obligations to a salutogenic approach-one that focuses on caring for the whole
person in order to improve overall well-being and quality of life.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/medethics-2020-107171 
PMID: 34162736 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


15. BMC Nurs. 2021 Jun 23;20(1):107. doi: 10.1186/s12912-021-00631-1.

Sense of coherence and strategies for coping with stress among nurses.

Betke K(1), Basińska MA(2), Andruszkiewicz A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Nicolaus Copernicus University in Poland Ludwig Rydygier Collegium Medicum in 
Bydgoszcz, Faculty of Health Sciences, Bydgoszcz, Poland.
katarzyna.betke@cm.umk.pl.
(2)Kazimierz Wielki University in Bydgoszcz, Faculty of Psychology, Bydgoszcz,
Poland.
(3)Nicolaus Copernicus University in Poland Ludwig Rydygier Collegium Medicum in 
Bydgoszcz, Faculty of Health Sciences, Bydgoszcz, Poland.

BACKGROUND: The nursing profession is associated with constant presence of
difficult situations and stress, which arise from responsibility for the highest 
values - human life and health. With demographic changes in the society, the
demand for nursing care increases. Looking after the health of nursing staff
becomes a non-material investment in employees. One of the most important health 
potentials described in literature is the sense of coherence. It can
significantly contribute to maintaining good health, modify one's functioning in 
a stressful working environment and influence the choice of strategies for coping
with stress.
AIM: The aim of the study was to describe the specific relationship between the
sense of coherence and strategies for coping with stress in a group of
professionally active nurses.
METHODOLOGY AND METHODS: The study involved 91 nurses in central Poland, aged
22-52. The group was diversified in terms of: education, work system, marital
status and place of residence. The study was conducted with the use of: Sense of 
Coherence Questionnaire SOC-29 and Inventory to Measure Coping Strategies with
Stress - Mini-COPE. The study was conducted in accordance with the principles of 
scientific research set out in the Helsinki Declaration.
RESULTS: The sense of coherence value in the test group was M = 134.24
(SD = 19.55). In stressful situations nurses most often used active strategies to
cope with stress: Planning M = 2.10 (SD = 0.54), Seeking Emotional Social Support
M = 1.95 (SD = 0.68) and Seeking Instrumental Social Support M = 1.95
(SD = 0.69), and the least frequently: Alcohol/Drug Use M = 0.28 (SD = 0.48). The
level of the sense of coherence and its components differentiated the strategies 
of coping with stress used in the examined group of nurses.
CONCLUSIONS: The research confirmed that the sense of coherence serves as a
health potential in a stressful working environment - a high sense of coherence
translate into better mental health, correct functioning in the working
environment, and using adaptive strategies of coping with stress. Nurses with a
stronger sense of coherence used more adaptive strategies to deal with stress
than those with average or low levels.

DOI: 10.1186/s12912-021-00631-1 
PMCID: PMC8220127
PMID: 34162376 


16. Rev Med Suisse. 2021 Jun 23;17(744):1194-1199.

[Functional pain syndromes - beyond nociception].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Zurrón N(1), Egloff N(2).

Author information: 
(1)CEMIC et Centre d'antalgie, CHUV, 1011 Lausanne.
(2)Faculté de médecine, Université de Berne, 3010 Berne.

Functional pain disorders are frequent and represent a significant burden in
primary care consultations. Scientific advances in neuroscience allow us to
understand these syndromes from the perspective of perceptual, vegetative,
affective and cognitive dysfunction. Simple tools can be useful in the history
and clinical examination, looking specifically for positive signs in favor of a
functional pain disorder. It is important to maintain a primary care management, 
following some principles summarized in expert recommendations. Building a solid 
trust relationship, a salutogenesis approach and medical and therapeutic
deceleration («choose wisely») are to be favored.

Publisher: Les troubles douloureux fonctionnels sont fréquents et représentent
une charge importante dans les consultations de premier recours. Les avancées
scientifiques des neurosciences permettent de comprendre ces syndromes dans une
perspective de dysfonction perceptive, végétative, affective et cognitive. Des
outils simples peuvent être utiles dans l’anamnèse et l’examen clinique, en
cherchant spécifiquement des signes positifs en faveur d’un trouble douloureux
fonctionnel. Il est important de maintenir une prise en charge en médecine de
premier recours, en suivant quelques principes résumés dans des recommandations
d’experts. La construction d’un lien de confiance solide, une approche de
salutogenèse, et la décélération médicale et thérapeutique (choose wisely) sont à
privilégier.

PMID: 34160914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Les auteurs n’ont déclaré aucun conflit
d’intérêts en relation avec cet article.


17. Death Stud. 2021 Jun 23:1-9. doi: 10.1080/07481187.2021.1936295. [Epub ahead of
print]

The role of sense of coherence and emotion regulation difficulties in the
relationship between early maladaptive schemas and grief.

Kaya-Demir D(1), Çırakoğlu OC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Psychological Counseling Unit, Özyeğin University, İstanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Psychology, Başkent University, Ankara, Turkey.

Few studies examine the relationship of grief with interrelated and broad
concepts. In this study, the role of sense of coherence and emotion regulation
difficulties in the relationship between early maladaptive schemas and grief was 
investigated with individuals (N = 254) who have lost a close person in the last 
5 years. Mediation and moderated mediation analyses revealed that individuals
with early maladaptive schemas may experience more complicated grief symptoms
through the effect of early maladaptive schemas. For individuals with
self-sacrifice schema, difficulties in the grief process were regulated by
moderate to high levels of sense of coherence.

DOI: 10.1080/07481187.2021.1936295 
PMID: 34159890 


18. Int J Qual Stud Health Well-being. 2021 Dec;16(1):1939937. doi:
10.1080/17482631.2021.1939937.

The birthing room and its influence on the promotion of a normal physiological
childbirth - a qualitative interview study with midwives in Sweden.

Andrén A(1)(2), Begley C(3), Dahlberg H(1), Berg M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health and Care Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Obstetrics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Region Västra
Götaland, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)School of Nursing and Midwifery, Trinity College Dublin, The University of
Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.

The birthing room is a major workplace for midwives but how it influences them in
practice is not enough investigated.Purpose: This study aimed to explore
midwives´ experiences of how the birthing room affects them in their work to
promote a normal physiological birth.Methods: A phenomenological reflective
lifeworld research approach was used and included individual interviews with 15
midwives working at four different hospitals in western Sweden, and of which two 
also assisted at homebirths. The analysis focused on the meanings of the study
phenomenon.Results: A birthing room can by its design either support a normal
physiological birth or support a risk approach to childbirth. Four opposing
constituents complete the essential meaning of the birthing rooms, and to which
the midwives need to relate in their roles as guardians for normal birth: i) a
private or a public room; ii) a home-like or hospital-like room; iii) a room
promoting activity or passivity; iv) a room promoting the midwife´s presence or
absence.Conclusions: The birthing room mirrors a pathogenic-oriented care
approach. A presupposition for the work to keep the birth bubble intact is to
protect the mother from disturbing elements both inside and outside the room.

DOI: 10.1080/17482631.2021.1939937 
PMCID: PMC8216256
PMID: 34148522 


19. PLoS One. 2021 Jun 18;16(6):e0253447. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0253447.
eCollection 2021.

Burnout, satisfaction and happiness among German general practitioners (GPs): A
cross-sectional survey on health resources and stressors.

Werdecker L(1), Esch T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Integrative Health Care and Health Promotion, Faculty of Health,
School of Medicine, Witten/Herdecke University, Witten, Germany.

Well-being is a major issue among health care professionals, especially
physicians. Less job satisfaction and impaired health can have an impact on
health care quality. Our aim was to examine the association of stressors
(illegitimate tasks) and health related resources (work-related sense of
coherence; recovery experience) with life satisfaction, happiness, job
satisfaction and burnout among German general practitioners (GPs). We conducted a
cross-sectional survey among general medical practices in Germany. Main outcome
measures were life satisfaction, happiness (Subjective Happiness Scale), job
satisfaction (Work Satisfaction Scale) and burnout (Copenhagen Burnout
Inventory). 548 GPs from across Germany participated (53.6% males, 45.6% females;
mostly representative of German GPs). One third (35.2%) of the participants
reported a high prevalence of personal, and one quarter (26.5%) indicated a high 
prevalence of work-related burnout symptoms. Illegitimate tasks are negatively
associated with life and job satisfaction and are positively associated with
personal, work-related and patient-related burnout among GPs. Work-SoC and
recovery experience are positively associated with life satisfaction, happiness, 
and job satisfaction and are negatively associated with personal, work-related
and patient-related burnout. Female physicians have a higher job satisfaction
than male physicians. Being female and working as an employed physician is
associated with a higher prevalence of personal burnout symptoms. GPs working in 
a group practice are happier and more satisfied with their job than GPs in single
practices. Personal, work-related and patient-related burnout symptoms are
stronger in GPs working in a single practice than in GPs in group practices. Our 
results highlight that Work-SoC, recovery experience and illegitimate tasks are
important for creating work-related well-being among GPs. Introducing health
promotion activities which aim to strengthen recovery experience and Work-SoC, as
well as interventions to restructure tasks, may increase life satisfaction,
happiness, and job satisfaction and reduce burnout symptoms in this health care
profession.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0253447 
PMCID: PMC8213182
PMID: 34143849 

Conflict of interest statement: The study is funded by the commercial source Dr. 
Ausbüttel & Co. GmbH. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on
sharing data and materials.


20. J Adv Nurs. 2021 Jun 18. doi: 10.1111/jan.14940. [Epub ahead of print]

Impact of sense of coherence, resilience and loneliness on quality of life
amongst older adults in long-term care: A correlational study using the
salutogenic model.

Tan JY(1), Tam WSW(2), Goh HS(2), Ow CC(3), Wu XV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Alice Lee Centre for Nursing Studies, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Kwong Wai Shiu Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.

AIMS: This study aimed to identify the predicting factors of quality of life
(QoL) from a set of psychosocial, sociodemographic and clinical variables amongst
older adults in a long-term care setting.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional, descriptive correlational study.
METHOD: The study was conducted in a nursing home and a day care centre from July
to December 2019. Two hundred older adults were recruited. Guided by the
salutogenic model, the sense of coherence (SOC) scale, Connor-Davidson resilience
scale, de Jong Gierveld loneliness scale and World Health Organization quality of
life instrument-older adults (WHOQOL-OLD) were used. The sociodemographic and
clinical profiles of participants were collected. Descriptive statistics, Pearson
product-moment correlation coefficient, independent-samples t test, one-way
analysis of variance and stepwise regression were utilised in the analysis.
RESULTS: The mean score for WHOQOL-OLD was 94.42 ± 19.55. The highest mean score 
was observed in the "Death and Dying" facet, while the lowest mean scores were
reflected in the "Autonomy" and "Intimacy" facets of QoL. Regardless of resident 
type, most QoL scores were similar across different variables. Based on the
stepwise regression, higher manageability and meaningfulness in SOC, higher
resilience, lower social loneliness, lower emotional loneliness and hearing
impairments are significantly associated with higher QoL.
CONCLUSION: Manageability, meaningfulness and resilience should be enhanced while
ameliorating feelings of loneliness to improve the QoL amongst older adults
receiving long-term care. Age, marital status, educational level, care
arrangement, body mass index, performance in activities of daily living,
comorbidities and hearing and mobility impairments could influence QoL and thus
warrant more attention.
IMPACT: Future interventions can be conducted in group sessions to facilitate
social interaction and alleviate loneliness. More resources should be allocated
to enhance older adults' care arrangements and coping mechanisms to provide them 
with the support, as they face challenges in daily life due to mobility
impairment and other restrictions.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jan.14940 
PMID: 34142732 


21. Health Promot Int. 2021 Jun 18. pii: daab073. doi: 10.1093/heapro/daab073. [Epub 
ahead of print]

The need for adolescents' agency in salutogenic approaches shaping physical
activity in schools.

Boonekamp GMM(1), Jansen E(2), O'Sullivan T(3), Dierx JAJ(4), Lindström B(5),
Pérez-Wilson P(6), Álvarez-Dardet Díaz C(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)School of Sport and Exercise, HAN University of Applied Sciences, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.
(2)Research Centre for Social Support and Community Care, HAN University of
Applied Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.
(4)Research Group Living in Motion, AVANS University of Applied Science, Breda,
The Netherlands.
(5)NTNU Center for Health Promotion Research, NTNU, Norway.
(6)Health and Family Medicine Program, School of Medicine, University of
Concepcion, Concepcion, Chile.
(7)Public Health Research Group, University of Alicante, Alicante, Spain.
(8)CIBERESP, Madrid, Spain.

Physical activity (PA) contributes to health throughout life. In particular,
young people can benefit from this. Schools can play a key role in providing
learning conditions to experience meaningful PAs aimed at inspiring students to
lifelong PA. In this article, we argue the need for a salutogenic approach in
schools focussing on respecting and enhancing adolescents' agency with regard to 
their PA. This approach entails listening to adolescents' perspectives and
inviting them to participate in actively designing and carrying out PA as a
prerequisite for their inclusive engagement. We unpack the concept of agency by
drawing on insights from the Capability Approach. This provides input for the
integration of agency in health promoting schools and salutogenic approaches, to 
enhance PA-related agency. Finally, we outline a research agenda to, eventually, 
create opportunities for students in schools to expand their PA-related agency.
Lay Summary Physical activity (PA) contributes to health throughout life. Schools
can play a key role in fostering meaningful PA experiences to inspire students to
lifelong PA. This requires schools to focus on students' personal aspirations,
providing them with the space to develop their autonomy and find opportunities to
decide and act upon expanding their agency with respect to the physically active 
lifestyles they deem meaningful.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/daab073 
PMID: 34142137 


22. Sci Prog. 2021 Apr-Jun;104(2):368504211026121. doi: 10.1177/00368504211026121.

History of contact with the SARS-COV-2 virus and the sense of coherence in the
development of psychological distress in the occupational health professionals in
Spain.

Gómez-Salgado J(1)(2), Ortega-Moreno M(3), Soriano G(4), Fagundo-Rivera J(5)(6), 
Allande-Cussó R(7), Ruiz-Frutos C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sociology, Social Work and Public Health, Faculty of Labour
Sciences, University of Huelva, Huelva, Spain.
(2)Safety and Health Postgraduate Programme, Universidad Espíritu Santo,
Guayaquil, Ecuador.
(3)Department of Economy, Faculty of Labour Sciences, University of Huelva,
Huelva, Spain.
(4)Spanish Association of Specialists in Occupational Medicine, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Health Sciences Doctorate School, University of Huelva, Huelva, Spain.
(6)Nursing Department, Atlântica Health School, Barcarena, Portugal.
(7)Nursing Department, University of Seville, Seville, Spain.

The COVID-19 pandemic has affected the psychological well-being of healthcare
professionals, among them, on medical and nursing occupational specialists. This 
study describes the psychological distress that this group has suffered,
analyzing the effect that the sense of coherence related with the history of
contact with infected people has generated in their mental health.
Cross-sectional descriptive study using online questionnaires. Data were
collected on a sample of 499 subjects, representing 42.0% and 38.8% of the
associations of specialists in Occupational Medicine and Nursing, respectively. A
univariate data analysis, independence test, and the CHAID multivariate method
were carried out. The percentage of workers with high psychological distress was 
higher among women than among men; this was also higher in public sector workers 
than in the private sector. No differences have been observed regarding
psychological distress and educational level, coexistence, having children,
working away from home, having a pet, or between being a physician or nurse. The 
most efficient measure to prevent psychological distress was acting regarding the
comprehensibility dimension of the sense of coherence. Sex, contact with any
infected person, age, living as a couple, working in public or private centers,
the availability of diagnostic tests, and the correlation with the manageability 
dimension were modulating factors. Sense of coherence is an effective measure to 
prevent psychological distress due to contact with people affected by COVID-19 in
Occupational Health professionals.

DOI: 10.1177/00368504211026121 
PMID: 34137643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Sci Rep. 2021 Jun 16;11(1):12629. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-92042-0.

Socioeconomic position links circulatory microbiota differences with biological
age.

Craven H(#)(1), McGuinness D(#)(1), Buchanan S(1), Galbraith N(2), McGuinness
DH(3), Jones B(4), Combet E(5), Mafra D(6), Bergman P(7), Ellaway A(8),
Stenvinkel P(7), Ijaz UZ(9), Shiels PG(10).

Author information: 
(1)Wolfson Wohl Translational Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Sciences,
MVLS, Garscube Estate, University of Glasgow, Switchback Road, Glasgow, G61 1QH, 
UK.
(2)NHS GG&C, Glasgow, UK.
(3)Glasgow Polyomics, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(4)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, UK.
(5)School of Medicine, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(6)Fluminense Federal University (UFF), Niterói, RJ, Brazil.
(7)Division of Renal Medicine M99, Department of Clinical Science, Intervention
and Technology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Institute of Health and Wellbeing, MVLS, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(9)School of Engineering, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
umer.ijaz@glasgow.ac.uk.
(10)Wolfson Wohl Translational Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Sciences,
MVLS, Garscube Estate, University of Glasgow, Switchback Road, Glasgow, G61 1QH, 
UK. paul.shiels@glasgow.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Imbalanced nutrition is associated with accelerated ageing, possibly mediated by 
microbiota. An analysis of the circulatory microbiota obtained from the
leukocytes of participants in the MRC Twenty-07 general population cohort was
performed. We now report that in this cohort, the most biologically aged exhibit 
a significantly higher abundance of circulatory pathogenic bacteria, including
Neisseria, Rothia and Porphyromonas, while those less biologically aged possess
more circulatory salutogenic (defined as being supportive of human health and
wellbeing) bacteria, including Lactobacillus, Lachnospiraceae UCG-004 and
Kocuria. The presence of these salutogenic bactreria is consistent with a
capacity to metabolise and produce Nrf2 agonists. We also demonstrate that
associated one carbon metabolism, notably betaine levels, did not vary with
chronological age, but displayed a difference with socioeconomic position (SEP). 
Those at lower SEP possessed significantly lower betaine levels indicative of a
poorer diet and poorer health span and consistent with reduced global DNA
methylation levels in this group. Our data suggest a clear route to improving age
related health and resilience based on dietary modulation of the microbiota.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-92042-0 
PMCID: PMC8209159
PMID: 34135381 


24. Int J Equity Health. 2021 Jun 16;20(1):140. doi: 10.1186/s12939-021-01470-x.

Tipping the scales: a theoretical model to describe the differential effects of
the COVID-19 pandemic on mortality.

Saban M(#)(1), Myers V(#)(2), Luxenburg O(3), Wilf-Miron R(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Gertner Institute for Epidemiology and Health Policy Research, Sheba Medical
Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel. mors@gertner.health.gov.il.
(2)Gertner Institute for Epidemiology and Health Policy Research, Sheba Medical
Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel.
(3)Medical Technology, Health Information and Research Directorate, Ministry of
Health, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)School of Public Health, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University,
Sackler, Israel.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in changes in almost every aspect 
of life. The fatal consequences of the pandemic have been clearly reported, with 
direct and indirect effects; however, there is some evidence of a positive
secondary impact, such as fewer motor accidents, lower influenza burden and
reduced air pollution.
METHODS/MODEL: We present a model to describe the differing effects of the
COVID-19 pandemic on mortality, taking into account external pressures and
internal resources and their relationship with resilience and health behaviors,
which affect mortality risk, inspired by elements of the salutogenic model.
Individuals with lower resources and from more deprived communities are likely to
be more negatively affected by the external changes occurring, while those with
more resources may be more likely to experience the benefits. Both individual and
community resources affect coping and influence both mental and physical health.
CONCLUSIONS: Decision makers should consider ways to incorporate the positive
changes which occurred as part of the exit strategy. Societies should invest in
building resources to improve both individual and community resilience to help
people be better prepared and more able to cope and adapt in times of crisis.
Special emphasis should be given to weaker populations most affected by external 
changes, including older people, low socioeconomic groups, those with mental
health issues and minority groups, in order to reduce disparities.

DOI: 10.1186/s12939-021-01470-x 
PMCID: PMC8206897
PMID: 34134710  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Public Health. 2021 Jun 12;196:10-17. doi: 10.1016/j.puhe.2021.04.032. [Epub
ahead of print]

Distinguishing independent and shared effects of material/structural conditions
and psychosocial resources on educational inequalities in self-rated health:
results from structural equation modelling.

Granström F(1), Garvin P(2), Molarius A(3), Kristenson M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health, Medicine and Caring Sciences, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden; Centre for Clinical Research Sörmland, Uppsala University,
Eskilstuna, Sweden. Electronic address: fredrik.granstrom@bra.se.
(2)Department of Health, Medicine and Caring Sciences, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden; Research and Development Unit in Region Östergötland,
Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(3)Centre for Clinical Research, Region Värmland, Karlstad, Sweden; Department of
Public Health, Karlstad University, Karlstad, Sweden.
(4)Department of Health, Medicine and Caring Sciences, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to distinguish independent and shared
effects of material/structural factors and psychosocial resources in explaining
educational inequalities in self-rated health (SRH) by using structural equation 
modelling.
STUDY DESIGN: Cross-sectional survey.
METHODS: Data were derived from a questionnaire sent to a random sample of the
population in five counties in Sweden in 2008. The study population (aged 25-75
years) included 15,099 men and 17,883 women. Exploratory structural equation
modelling was used to analyse the pathways from educational level to SRH.
RESULTS: The pathway including both material/structural factors (e.g. financial
buffer and unemployment) and psychosocial resources (e.g. sense of coherence and 
social participation) explained about 40% of educational differences in SRH for
both men and women. The pathways including only the independent effects of
psychosocial resources (14% in men and 20% in women) or material/structural
factors (9% and 18%, respectively) explained substantial but smaller proportions 
of the differences.
CONCLUSIONS: The major pathway explaining educational inequalities in SRH
included both material/structural factors and psychosocial resources. Therefore, 
to reduce educational inequalities in SRH, interventions need to address both
material/structural conditions and psychosocial resources across educational
groups.

Copyright © 2021 The Royal Society for Public Health. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.puhe.2021.04.032 
PMID: 34129915 


26. Int J Qual Stud Health Well-being. 2021 Dec;16(1):1938957. doi:
10.1080/17482631.2021.1938957.

Recovery at the Clubhouse: challenge, responsibility and growing into a role.

Fekete OR(1)(2), Langeland E(3), Larsen TMB(2), Davidson L(4), Kinn LG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health and Social Sciences, Western Norway University of Applied
Sciences, Bergen, Norway.
(2)Department of Health Promotion and Development, Faculty of Psychology,
University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Health and Caring Sciences, Faculty of Health and Social
Sciences, Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, Bergen, Norway.
(4)Yale Program for Recovery and Community Health, Yale University, New Haven,
CT, USA.
(5)Department of Welfare and Participation, Faculty of Health and Social
Sciences, Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, Bergen, Norway.

Purpose: To explore how people with mental illness experience recovery in the
Clubhouse context, and which ingredients of the model they find active in
promoting recovery.Methods: Hermeneutic-phenomenological design. Individual,
semi-structured interviews with 18 Norwegian Clubhouse members. Systematic text
condensation was used in analysis.Results: Three main themes emerged: "Balancing 
unlimited support with meeting challenges", with two sub-themes: "Unlimited
membership: space for self-agency or hindering development?" and "Becoming a
Clubhouse member: concerns and positive experiences". The second main theme was: 
"Learning how to build new skills and roles in the community". The third main
theme was: "Getting better through and for work", with two sub-themes: "Work at
the Clubhouse as a means to recovery" and "Preparing for a working life in
society". Overall, participants experienced improved mental and social wellbeing 
and work readiness.Conclusions: Recovery in the Clubhouse context requires
members' personal initiative, thus people having poor mental health might
struggle with utilizing the Clubhouse. However, participants reported that lack
of challenges within the community thwarted their recovery. Based on
Salutogenesis, conscious application of challenge in Clubhouse activities might
enhance members' recovery. Furthermore, participants' all-round involvement in
their recovery journeys suggests the importance of shared decision-making in
recovery-oriented services.

DOI: 10.1080/17482631.2021.1938957 
PMCID: PMC8208115
PMID: 34126865 


27. Perspect Public Health. 2021 Jun 12:17579139211011496. doi:
10.1177/17579139211011496. [Epub ahead of print]

The influence of residential greenness on mortality in the Asia-Pacific region: a
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Kua KP(1), Lee S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Puchong Health Clinic, Petaling District Health Office, Ministry of Health
Malaysia, Petaling, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Monash University, Subang Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia; Asian 
Centre for Evidence Synthesis in Population, Implementation, and Clinical
Outcomes (PICO), Health and Well-Being Cluster, Global Asia in the 21st Century
(GA21) Platform, Monash University, Subang Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia;
Gerontechnology Laboratory, Global Asia in the 21st Century (GA21) Platform,
Monash University, Subang Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia; Faculty of Health and Medical
Sciences, Taylor's University, Subang Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia.

AIMS: To critically appraise the evidence of the impact of exposure to
salutogenic green environment on mortality, which is an important endpoint in
epidemiological and clinical studies.
METHODS: We searched for studies published and indexed in three databases
(PubMed, AMED, and CINAHL Plus) from inception until 31 March 2020, complemented 
with a search of cited literature for articles describing the effects of
greenness on mortality in Asia-Pacific region. Eligible articles were screened
and data were extracted independently by two reviewers. A random-effects model
was utilised to obtain pool hazard ratio (HR) and risk ratio of all-cause
mortality outcome.
RESULTS: The search identified 3239 studies, of which 20 studies reporting
133,363 participants from longitudinal cohort studies and 202 million people from
population-based prevalence studies were included in the review. The majority of 
the studies (60%) were conducted in high-income countries in Asia-Pacific. All
participants of the longitudinal cohort studies were aged 60 years or older,
whereas the prevalence studies involved people of all age groups. A significant
protective association of green environment exposure with all-cause mortality was
reported in 18 studies. Pooled results from five studies showed increased level
of greenness exposure was associated with a significant decrease in all-cause
mortality (pooled HR = 0.97; 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.93 to 1.02;
p < 0.01; I²= 87.8%). Meta-analysis of total number of deaths in different
quartiles of green spaces noted decreased risks of mortality with all causes of
death with increased surrounding greenness.
CONCLUSIONS: Some limited evidence suggests that populations exposed to the
greener environment have a lower risk of mortality, implying the potential role
of greenness in increasing longevity. Further studies with standardised design
and outcome reporting should be conducted in low- and middle-income countries and
in populations of low socioeconomic status to glean more generalisable and
complete evidence for public health policy implications.

DOI: 10.1177/17579139211011496 
PMID: 34120524 


28. J Child Health Care. 2021 Jun 11:13674935211026123. doi:
10.1177/13674935211026123. [Epub ahead of print]

Child and family health nurses' roles in the care of infants and children: A
scoping review.

Wightman L(1), Hutton A(2), Grant J(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Nursing and Health Sciences, 1065Flinders University, Adelaide, SA,
Australia.
(2)School of Nursing and Midwifery, Faculty of Health and Medicine, 5982The
University of Newcastle, Callaghan NSW, Australia.
(3)School of Nursing, Midwifery & Indigenous Health, 89470Charles Sturt
University, Bathurst, NSW, Australia.

Child and family health nurses (CFHNs) work in a variety of settings with
families to promote optimal growth and development in infants and children from
birth to 5 years. Literature is available about models of care that CFHNs use in 
their work, but there is limited information about how CFHNs enact care
specifically for infants and children. The aim of this scoping review was to
identify and contextualize existing knowledge of how CFHNs, both in Australia and
internationally, care for infants and children. Arksey and O'Malley's (2005)
framework was used to review 27 studies from Australia, Sweden, Finland, United
Kingdom (UK), United States of America (USA), Ireland, Netherlands, Denmark and
Canada. It was identified that CFHNs, equipped with a range of assessment tools
for early intervention and health promotion, use a partnership approach when
working with parents to promote the health and well-being of infants and
children. The literature revealed the complexity of the roles undertaken by CFHNs
when caring for infants and children. Review findings indicated that CFHNs' work 
is distinctive because it is conducted in home and community settings, is
relational and salutogenic in nature and is also located in the domain of
preventative health and early intervention.

DOI: 10.1177/13674935211026123 
PMID: 34116592 


29. J Clin Nurs. 2021 Jun 10. doi: 10.1111/jocn.15895. [Epub ahead of print]

The effect of salutogenesis-based care on the sense of coherence in peritoneal
dialysis patients.

Uzdil N(1), Ceyhan Ö(2), Şimşek N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Department of Mental Health and Disease Nursing,
Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, Department of Internal Medicine Nursing, Erciyes
University, Kayseri, Turkey.

AIMS: This research is conducted to determine the effect of salutogenesis-based
home care on the sense of coherence in patients with peritoneal dialysis.
BACKGROUND: Recent studies on the salutogenesis model have shown that the model
is effective in promoting and improving health. It was observed that studies
based on the salutogenesis model were carried out in the form of a training
programme, and there was no study that shows its effectiveness on patient care by
integrating it into the nursing process.
DESIGN: The research is conducted as a pre-test-post-test control group
experimental study.
METHODS: The study included 73 patients, including 36 in the intervention group
and 37 in the control group. The research data are collected using the Patient
Identifier Information Form, Dialysis Symptom Index (DSI), General Self-Efficacy 
Scale (GSES) and the Sense of Coherence Scale (SIS). The intervention group is
provided care based on the salutogenesis model by making home visits 1 time per
week for 8 weeks. In this study, the TREND checklist was followed for
non-randomised controlled trials.
RESULTS: In the study, the pre-test DSI, GSES and SIS (meaningfulness,
comprehensibility, manageability sub-dimension) mean scores of the individuals in
the intervention and control groups are similar. The third-month and sixth-month 
intervention group SIS total and sub-dimension scores and GSES scores are found
to be statistically significantly higher than the scores of the control group.
CONCLUSIONS: As a result of the study, it is determined that the care based on
the salutogenesis model provided to peritoneal dialysis patients increases the
sense of coherence and self-efficacy and provides symptom control and decreases
the dialysis symptoms.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: It has been observed that the salutogenesis model
can be used as a step of nursing care in providing symptom control by
strengthening the self-efficacy of patients in clinical and home care.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jocn.15895 
PMID: 34114288 


30. Disabil Rehabil. 2021 Jun 9:1-8. doi: 10.1080/09638288.2021.1936660. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Assessment of health status in adolescents with spina bifida in the West Bank,
Palestine: sense of coherence and self-perceived health.

Nahal MSH(1), Wigert H(2), Imam A(3), Axelsson ÅB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Nursing, College of Health Professions, Al-Quds University, Abu
Dies Campus, Jerusalem, Palestine.
(2)Faculty of Nursing, Institute of Health and Care Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy
at Gothenburg University and Division of Neonatology, Sahlgrenska University
Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Health and Community Studies, School of Public Health at Al-Quds University,
Abu Dies Campus, Jerusalem, Palestine.
(4)Nursing, Institute of Health and Care Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy at
Gothenburg University and Division of Cardiology, Sahlgrenska University
Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.

PURPOSE: To assess self-perceived health and sense of coherence (SOC) in
adolescents with spina bifida (SB) in the West Bank, Palestine, compared to a
healthy reference group. Further, to assess the association between impairment
levels in the adolescents with SB and their self-perceived health and SOC.
METHODS: Fifty adolescents with SB and 150 healthy adolescents completed measures
of self-perceived health - the Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory (PedsQLTM 4.0)
- and SOC. The rehabilitation center nurses identified the physical impairments
of the adolescents with SB from their medical records, and classified them by
impairment severity.
RESULTS: Adolescents with SB reported lower self-perceived health (PedsQL median 
55, IQR 42-67), than the reference group (median 85, IQR 74-90), p < 0.001, and
lower SOC (median 47, IQR 44-50) than the reference group (median 55, IQR 44-61),
p < 0.001. Impairment level was inversely associated with both self-perceived
health and SOC.
CONCLUSIONS: The low self-perceived health and SOC among adolescents with SB in
Palestine indicate the need for collaboration between policy makers and providers
to improve these adolescents' physical and social environment and to promote the 
rehabilitation services provided for them.Implications for rehabilitationThe low 
self-perceived health and SOC among adolescents with SB in Palestine highlight
the need to develop appropriate interventions to promote their health,
independency, and self-care management.Collaboration of the caregivers and health
care providers is required to develop, implement, and evaluate intervention
programs that might promote coping abilities of the adolescents with SB.A
multidisciplinary approach is needed to set goals that have a meaningful impact
on social, emotional, behavioral, and educational conditions of the adolescents
with SB and in different settings, for example, home, school, and community.The
environment in Palestine presents barriers to the social engagement of
adolescents with SB, and new ways are needed to enhance their participation in
the society to promote their self-concept and wellbeing.

DOI: 10.1080/09638288.2021.1936660 
PMID: 34106796 


31. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 May 14;100(19):e25735. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000025735.

Comprehensive analysis of depression-related factors among middle-aged residents 
in Japan, an Eastern culture: A cross-sectional study.

Fukita S(1)(2), Kawasaki H(2), Yamasaki S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Nursing & Medical Care, Keio University, Kanagawa.
(2)Graduate School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University,
Hiroshima, Japan.

ABSTRACT: There is a need to comprehensively identify depression-related factors,
including individual and socioeconomic factors, in each country or cultural area,
to consider effective measures to address depression within communities. However,
there are not enough studies on middle-aged residents in Japan or other Eastern
countries to currently achieve this. Thus, the aim of this study was to
comprehensively identify factors related to depression in middle-aged residents
in Japan, an Eastern country.The study design was cross-sectional. A
questionnaire survey was conducted among all community residents aged 40 to 59 in
a rural municipality in Western Japan. The questionnaire contained items on
demographic characteristics, psychological factors, health-related behaviors, and
socioeconomic factors. A Chi-Squared test or Fisher exact test was used to
analyze the relationships between depression and each assessed factor. Next, a
logistic regression analysis was performed to identify comprehensive
relationships between depression and its related factors.Data from 362
participants were analyzed. The average age was 51.5 years; 148 were male. A
Chi-Squared test or Fisher exact test demonstrated that many psychological
factors, health-related behaviors, and socioeconomic factors ware significantly
related to depression. A logistic regression analysis showed that depression was 
significantly associated with male gender, low sense of coherence, high cognitive
stress levels, low help-seeking behavior, poor quality sleep, and a lack of
hobbies. Nagelkerke R2 was 51%.This study revealed through multivariate analysis 
that depression was primarily associated with personal behavioral and
psychological factors in Japan, an Eastern country with a holistic cultural
background. This result is consistent with findings from Western countries. This 
study can contribute the promotion and evaluation of preventive measures for
depression in Eastern culture that focus on individual behavioral and
psychological factors.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000025735 
PMCID: PMC8133093
PMID: 34106600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interests to
disclose.


32. Gynecol Obstet Fertil Senol. 2021 Jun 5. pii: S2468-7189(21)00157-4. doi:
10.1016/j.gofs.2021.06.001. [Epub ahead of print]

[Primary dysmenorrhea and psychological resources used by adolescent girls:
observational study of 247 high school girls in Finistère].

[Article in French]

Hernio CI(1), Delpech-Dunoyer G(2), Courtois-Communier E(3), Merviel P(2).

Author information: 
(1)École de Sages-Femmes de Brest, 22, avenue Camille Desmoulins, 29200 Brest,
France; Université de Bretagne Occidentale, 3, rue des Archives, 29200 Brest,
France; Centre Hospitalier Régional et universitaire de Brest, 2, avenue Foch,
29200 Brest, France. Electronic address: claire.hernio@gmail.com.
(2)École de Sages-Femmes de Brest, 22, avenue Camille Desmoulins, 29200 Brest,
France; Université de Bretagne Occidentale, 3, rue des Archives, 29200 Brest,
France; Centre Hospitalier Régional et universitaire de Brest, 2, avenue Foch,
29200 Brest, France.
(3)Centre Hospitalier Régional et universitaire de Brest, 2, avenue Foch, 29200
Brest, France.

INTRODUCTION: Primary dysmenorrhea affects 60% of adolescent girls between 14 and
19 years of age and higher rates of depression and absenteeism are found in these
young women. Having developed a sense of coherence (SOC) protects against
depression associated with and improves the experience of primary dysmenorrhea.
The aim of the study was to describe the association between primary dysmenorrhea
and SOC. MéTHODS: A multicentric and cross-sectional study was performed on 247
high school girls from Finistère (France).
RESULTS: Sixty point seven per cent of high school girls suffer from primary
dysmenorrhea: average VAS greater than or equal to 4 out of 10 with an
improvement in pain by analgesics if severe pain (greater than 7 out of 10) to
eliminate secondary dysmenorrhea (3.6% suspected). Thirty five point six per cent
do not present dysmenorrhea (VAS between 0 and 3). This study shows that having a
high SOC reduces menstrual pain (P=0.014). The main treatments used are not those
recommended by Clinical practice guidelines.
DISCUSSION: Interventions based on Comprehensive Sexuality Education, medical
consultations respecting salutogenic model would provide a better quality of life
for adolescent girls by promoting the development of psycho-social skills.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gofs.2021.06.001 
PMID: 34102323 


33. Front Psychol. 2021 May 21;12:612264. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.612264. eCollection
2021.

Development of a Salutogenesis Workshop for SPPs to Help Them, Their Athletes,
and the Athlete's Entourage Better Cope With Uncertainty During the COVID-19
Pandemic.

Leisterer S(1), Lautenbach F(1)(2), Walter N(1), Kronenberg L(1), Elbe AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sport Psychology, Institute of Sport Psychology and Sport
Pedagogy, Faculty of Sports Science, Leipzig University, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Sport Psychology, Department of Sport Sciences, Faculty of Humanities and
Social Sciences, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

The COVID-19 pandemic is also called a crisis of uncertainty because of so many
unforeseeable events like canceled qualification competitions, loss of training
facilities, and postponement of the Olympic games. Athletes and their entourage
experience this uncertainty as stressful. Sport psychology practitioners (SPPs)
are in a key position to support athletes in coping with these unforeseeable
stressors. However, SPPs are similarly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and
simultaneously have to cope with stress. Salutogenesis, which describes how to
manage stress and to stay well, provides a theoretical approach to how to cope
with uncertainty. The salutogenetic approach aims at strengthening individuals'
sense of coherence (SoC) and consists of three components, namely
comprehensibility, manageability, and meaningfulness. Although it is known that
the SoC can be enhanced via psychological skills training, so far, this approach 
has not been systematically applied to the elite sport context. Athletes have
been advised to see SPPs for help; thus, the question of how SPPs handle the time
of uncertainty while supporting others emerges. The aim of this contribution was 
to outline how the salutogenetic approach can be applied to strengthening SPPs'
SoC via a single-day four-part workshop. Additionally, we applied the workshop to
N = 26 volleyball coaches and evaluated the workshop's effects on participants'
psychological aspects [i.e., the Sense of Coherence-Leipziger short version
(SoC-L9), resilience (RS-13): coping with uncertainty, affective response, and
stress via semantic differentials] and the workshop's quality ratings (i.e.,
Quality Questionnaire for Sport Psychological Coaching, QS-17). The evaluation
provides results that show a positive impact on a descriptive level of the
participants' SoC, uncertainty, affect, and stress perception; however, the
results show no significant main effect of time [F(8, 10) = 1.04, p = 0.467, η p 
2 = 0.454]. Workshop quality (on average, 3.60 ± 0.35 out of 4.00) and skill
acquisition (on average, 3.00 ± 0.64 out of 4.00) were positively evaluated;
82.00% of the participants would use the learned tools in the future. Thus, we
outline how this workshop might help strengthen SPPs' SoC and at the same time
empower them to strengthen their athletes' SoC. Overall, we add a theoretical
(i.e., salutogenesis in sports) and a practical perspective (i.e., coping
techniques based on salutogenesis) on how to cope with the COVID-19 pandemic for 
SPPS, athletes, and their support network.

Copyright © 2021 Leisterer, Lautenbach, Walter, Kronenberg and Elbe.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.612264 
PMCID: PMC8177668
PMID: 34093305 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


34. Nihon Eiseigaku Zasshi. 2021;76(0). doi: 10.1265/jjh.20011.

[Factors Related to Attitudes toward Responses to Stress Survey in Stress Check
Program in Financial Industry].

[Article in Japanese]

Kawamura K(1)(2), Shimada A(2), Morioka I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Faculty of Nursing, Kyoto Tachibana University.
(2)Graduate School of Health and Nursing Science, Wakayama Medical University.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study is to clarify the factors related to
attitudes toward responses to a stress survey in the Stress Check Program, which 
is used to screen for workers with high psychosocial stress at the workplace.
METHODS: An anonymous self-administered questionnaire survey was conducted on
1,800 regular staff member of a financial industry (valid response rate: 72.0%). 
The questionnaire items were the brief job stress questionnaire (BJSQ), the sense
of coherence (SOC-13), the Japanese version of the Utrecht work engagement scale 
(UWES-J), attitudes toward responses to the stress survey, and the concerns of
subjects regarding the stress check program.
RESULTS: The stress in interpersonal relationships at the workplace in the BJSQ, 
"concerns about leaking results to the company", "concerns about receiving
persistent calls for an interview", and "concerns about a disadvantageous
treatment by the company" were positively related to 'writing general truths',
whereas the support from the boss in the BJSQ and the subscales of SOC-13 were
negatively related to 'writing general truths'. The stress in interpersonal
relationships at the workplace and "concerns about receiving persistent calls for
an interview" were positively related to 'writing falsehoods', but the
"dedication" in UWES-J was negatively related to 'writing falsehoods'.
CONCLUSIONS: To obtain authentic answers in the stress survey, it is important
(1) to smooth relationships at the workplace, (2) to devise operation systems
such as an interview guidance, and (3) to provide support that enhances the
ability of workers to cope with stress and work engagement.

DOI: 10.1265/jjh.20011 
PMID: 34092741 


35. J Educ Health Promot. 2021 Mar 31;10:105. doi: 10.4103/jehp.jehp_758_20.
eCollection 2021.

Relationship between the sense of coherence, self-directed learning readiness,
and academic performance in Malaysian undergraduate dental students.

Siddiqui FS(1), Nerali JT(2), Telang LA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry Penang, Malaysia.
(2)Department of General Dentistry, Penang, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Oral Medicine and Radiology Penang International Dental College,
Penang, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: Stress and low psychological well-being among students in higher
education impact their academic performance. The purpose of this study was to
determine the relationship between SOC, SDLR, and academic performance in year 3,
4, and 5 undergraduate dental students.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two hundred and ten students completed a validated
questionnaire on SOC and SDLR. The percentage of marks obtained by these students
in their year-end examination was used as their academic performance. The SOC
scores were further divided into three hierarchical clusters using cluster
analysis. The data were analyzed to determine the difference in the SDLR scores
and academic performance among the three clusters. Furthermore, the relationship 
between SOC scores, SDLR scores, and academic performance was assessed.
RESULTS: The SDLR scores significantly increased from the low SOC cluster to the 
high SOC cluster (P = 0.026). However, there was no significant change in
academic performance. A positive relationship was found between the SOC and the
academic performance (R = +0.025; P > 0.05). The SDLR had a significant positive 
relationship with both SOC and academic performance (R = +0.27; P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Although SOC may not have a direct influence on academic performance,
SDLR can play an intermediary role. Early identification and timely intervention 
in students with a weak SOC and low SDLR can have a beneficial influence on their
academic life.

Copyright: © 2021 Journal of Education and Health Promotion.

DOI: 10.4103/jehp.jehp_758_20 
PMCID: PMC8150091
PMID: 34084852 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


36. Eur J Gen Pract. 2021 Dec;27(1):103-110. doi: 10.1080/13814788.2021.1932810.

General practitioners' perceptions of treatment of chronically ill patients
managed in general practice: An interview study.

Marcussen M(1), Titlestad SB(1), Lee K(1), Bentzen N(1), Søndergaard J(1),
Nørgaard B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Patients with chronic conditions pose a major challenge to the Danish
healthcare system. Since 2018, disease management programmes for patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and type 2 diabetes (T2D) were
introduced in Denmark. Treatment in hospitals should be reserved for those
patients who require specialised treatment. Hence, more patients with COPD and
T2D fall within the general practitioners' (GPs) responsibility.
OBJECTIVES: This study explores GPs' perceptions of their role as physicians
responsible for the disease management programmes on COPD and T2D and their
perceptions of the quality of care provided to these patient groups.
METHODS: Between November 2019 and January 2020, we conducted semi-structured
interviews with 14 GPs from the five regions of Denmark. We analysed the
interviews using systematic text condensation inspired by Malterud's thematic
analysis.
RESULTS: The GPs stated that they have been managing the care of COPD and T2D
patients for over a decade, and they considered the quality of care to be high.
They believed that managing patient treatment pathways in general practice
settings contributes to a heightened sense of security for the patient, mainly
because of the long-standing and trusting relationship between the patient and
GP.
CONCLUSION: According to the GPs, they continue to play an important role as
treatment coordinators to ensure coherence and high quality in treating patients 
with COPD and type 2 diabetes.

DOI: 10.1080/13814788.2021.1932810 
PMCID: PMC8183538
PMID: 34078226 


37. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 May 27;18(11). pii: 5758. doi:
10.3390/ijerph18115758.

Dimensions of Community Assets for Health. A Systematised Review and
Meta-Synthesis.

Sáinz-Ruiz PA(1), Sanz-Valero J(1), Gea-Caballero V(2), Melo P(3)(4), Nguyen
TH(5), Suárez-Máximo JD(6), Martínez-Riera JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Nursing, Preventive Medicine, Public Health and
History of Science, University of Alicante, 03080 Alicante, Spain.
(2)Adscript Center of Universidad de Valencia, Research Group GREIACC, Health
Research Institute La Fe, Nursing School La Fe, Avda. Fernando Abril Martorell,
106. Pabellón docente Torre H, Hospital La Fe, 46026 Valencia, Spain.
(3)Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Health, Institute of Health Sciences,
School of Nursing (Porto), Universidade Católica Portuguesa, 4169-005 Porto,
Portugal.
(4)Center for Health Technology and Services Research, NursID Project, 4200-450
Porto, Portugal.
(5)William F. Connell School of Nursing, Boston College, Newton, MA 02467, USA.
(6)Titular de la Oficina Estatal de Educación de la Asociación Mexicana de
Estudiantes de Enfermería, División Puebla, Teziutlán 73800, Mexico.

Since Aaron Antonovsky's salutogenesis theory and Morgan and Ziglio's health
assets model were first proposed, there has been a growing concern to define the 
resources available to the individual and the community to maintain or improve
health and well-being. The aim of the present study was to identify the
dimensions that characterise community assets for health. To this end, we
conducted a systematised review with a meta-synthesis and content analysis of
research or projects involving asset mapping in the community. Articles that met 
our eligibility criteria were: (1) based on the salutogenic approach and (2)
described an assets mapping process and among their results, explained what, how 
and why particular community assets for health had been selected. The search
included primary studies in the published and grey literature which were selected
from websites and electronic databases (Web of Science, MEDLINE, Scopus,
EBSCOhost, Dialnet, SciELO). Of the 607 records examined by a single reviewer, 34
were included in the content analysis and 14 in the qualitative synthesis. Using 
an inductive process, we identified 14 dimensions with 24 categories, for which
in-depth literature reviews were then carried out to define specific indicators
and items. These dimensions were: utility, intention, previous use, accessibility
("circumstances-opportunity-affordability"), proximity-walkability, connectivity,
intelligibility (visibility, transparency), identity (uniqueness,
appropriability, attachment), design (configuration, functionality, comfort),
safety (objective/subjective), diversity, the dimension of public and private,
and sustainability (which includes maintenance, profitability or economic
sustainability, environmental sustainability, centrality-participation and
equity-inclusiveness).

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18115758 
PMCID: PMC8198194
PMID: 34072002 


38. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 May 13;18(10). pii: 5168. doi:
10.3390/ijerph18105168.

Strengthening Antenatal Care towards a Salutogenic Approach: A Meta-Ethnography.

Heinonen K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Health Care and Health Promotion, Metropolia University of Applied Sciences,
P.O. Box 4000, FI-00079 Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Department of Nursing Science, University of Eastern Finland, Yliopistonranta 
1, FI-70210 Kuopio, Finland.

The aim was to explore how midwives, public health nurses and nurses view caring 
in antenatal care (ANC) as provided for mothers and fathers/partners. Based on
Noblit and Hare (1988), meta-ethnography was used to address meaning by
synthesizing knowledge and understanding inductively through selected qualitative
studies (n = 16). Four core themes were identified: (1) supporting the parents to
awaken to parenthood and creating a firm foundation for early parenting and their
new life situation; (2) guiding parents on the path to parenthood and new
responsibility; (3) ensuring normality and the bond between baby and parents
while protecting life; and (4) promoting the health and wellbeing of the family
today and in the future. The overarching theme can be expressed as "helping the
woman and her partner prepare for their new life with the child by providing
individualized, shared care, firmly grounded and with a view of the future".
Caring in antenatal care (ANC) is being totally present, listening and using
multidimensional professional competence but also being open-minded to new
aspects and knowledge. The health promotion and positive health aspects should be
considered an important part of supporting parents and the whole family now and
in the future. A more conscious salutogenic approach to ANC would lead to more
favorable results and could be a fruitful research topic in the future. There is 
a need to provide midwives/nurses with enough time to allow them to concentrate
on specific needs and support for different kind of families in ANC but also
training for midwives to make them more familiar with online and other options.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18105168 
PMCID: PMC8152723
PMID: 34068114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 May 1;18(9). pii: 4845. doi:
10.3390/ijerph18094845.

The Evolution in Anxiety and Depression with the Progression of the Pandemic in
Adult Populations from Eight Countries and Four Continents.

Généreux M(1), Schluter PJ(2), Landaverde E(1), Hung KK(3), Wong CS(3), Mok
CPY(3), Blouin-Genest G(4), O'Sullivan T(5), David MD(6), Carignan ME(6),
Champagne-Poirier O(6), Pignard-Cheynel N(7), Salerno S(8), Lits G(9), d'Haenens 
L(10), Coninck D(11), Matthys K(11), Champagne E(12), Burlone N(12), Qadar Z(13),
Herbosa T(14), Ribeiro-Alves G(15), Law R(16), Murray V(17), Chan EYY(3), Roy
M(18).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Health Sciences, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences
de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC J1H 5N4, Canada.
(2)School of Health Sciences, University of Canterbury-Te Whare Wananga o
Waitaha, Christchurch 8140, New Zealand.
(3)Collaborating Centre for Oxford University and CUHK for Disaster and Medical
Humanitarian Response, JC School of Public Health and Primary Care, Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Ngan Shing Street 30-32, Hong Kong, China.
(4)School of Applied Politics, Faculté des Lettres et Sciences Humaines,
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC J1K 2R1, Canada.
(5)Interdisciplinary School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1N 7K4, Canada.
(6)Department of Communication, Faculté de Lettres et Sciences Humaines,
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC J1K 2R1, Canada.
(7)Académie du Journalisme et des Médias, Université de Neuchâtel, 2000
Neuchâtel, Switzerland.
(8)Medi@Lab, Université de Genève, Boulevard du Pont-d'Arve 40, 1205 Genève,
Switzerland.
(9)Institut Langage et Communication, Université catholique de Louvain, 1348
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
(10)Institute for Media Studies, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(11)Centre for Sociological Research, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(12)School of Political Studies, Faculty of Social Sciences, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada.
(13)National Collaborating Centre for Infectious Diseases, Rady Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB R3E 0T5, Canada.
(14)Department of Emergency Medicine, College of Medicine, University of
Philippines, Manille Grand, Manila 1000, Philippines.
(15)Centro Universitário de Brasília, Brasilia 70850-090, Brazil.
(16)Department of Health, Manila, Manila 2932, Philippines.
(17)Public Health England, London SE1 8UG, UK.
(18)Department of Family Medicine & Emergency Medicine, Faculté de Médecine et
des Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC J1H 5N4,
Canada.

Nearly a year after the classification of the COVID-19 outbreak as a global
pandemic, it is clear that different factors have contributed to an increase in
psychological disorders, including public health measures that infringe on
personal freedoms, growing financial losses, and conflicting messages. This study
examined the evolution of psychosocial impacts with the progression of the
pandemic in adult populations from different countries and continents, and
identified, among a wide range of individual and country-level factors, which
ones are contributing to this evolving psychological response. An online survey
was conducted in May/June 2020 and in November 2020, among a sample of 17,833
adults (Phase 1: 8806; Phase 2: 9027) from eight countries/regions (Canada, the
United States, England, Switzerland, Belgium, Hong Kong, the Philippines, New
Zealand). Probable generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) and major depressive
episode (MDE) were assessed. The independent role of potential factors was
examined using multilevel logistic regression. Probable GAD or MDE was indicated 
by 30.1% and 32.5% of the respondents during phases 1 and 2, respectively (a 7.9%
increase over time), with an important variation according to countries/regions
(range from 22.3% in Switzerland to 38.8% in the Philippines). This proportion
exceeded 50% among young adults (18-24 years old) in all countries except for
Switzerland. Beyond young age, several factors negatively influenced mental
health in times of pandemic; important factors were found, including weak sense
of coherence (adjusted odds ratio aOR = 3.89), false beliefs (aOR = 2.33), and
self-isolation/quarantine (aOR = 2.01). The world has entered a new era dominated
by psychological suffering and rising demand for mental health interventions,
along a continuum from health promotion to specialized healthcare. More than
ever, we need to innovate and build interventions aimed at strengthening key
protective factors, such as sense of coherence, in the fight against the
adversity caused by the concurrent pandemic and infodemic.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18094845 
PMCID: PMC8125359
PMID: 34062769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Implement Sci Commun. 2021 May 26;2(1):56. doi: 10.1186/s43058-021-00159-0.

Achieving 'coherence' in routine practice: a qualitative case-based study to
describe speech and language therapy interventions with implementation in mind.

Nicoll A(1)(2), Maxwell M(3), Williams B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Nursing, Midwifery and Allied Health Professions Research Unit, University of 
Stirling, Stirling, UK. avril.nicoll@abdn.ac.uk.
(2)Health Services Research Unit, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.
avril.nicoll@abdn.ac.uk.
(3)Nursing, Midwifery and Allied Health Professions Research Unit, University of 
Stirling, Stirling, UK.
(4)School of Health and Social Care, Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, UK.

BACKGROUND: Implementation depends on healthcare professionals being able to make
sense of a new intervention in relation to their routine practice. Normalisation 
Process Theory refers to this as coherence work. However, specifying what it
takes to achieve coherence is challenging because of variations in new
interventions, routine practices and the relationship between them. Frameworks
for intervention description may offer a way forward, as they provide broad
descriptive categories for comparing complex interventions. To date such
frameworks have not been informed by implementation theory, so do not account for
the coherence work involved in holding aspects of routine practice constant while
doing other aspects differently. Using speech and language therapy as an
empirical exemplar, we explored therapists' experiences of practice change and
developed a framework to show how coherence of child speech interventions is
achieved.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective case-based qualitative study of how
interventions for child speech problems had changed across three NHS speech and
language therapy services and private practice in Scotland. A coherence framework
was derived through interplay between empirical work with 42 therapists (using
in-depth interviews, or self-organised pairs or small focus groups) and
Normalisation Process Theory's construct of coherence.
FINDINGS: Therapists reported a range of practice changes, which had demanded
different types of coherence work. Non-traditional interventions had featured for
many years in the profession's research literature but not in clinical practice. 
Achieving coherence with these interventions was intellectually demanding because
they challenged the traditional linguistic assumptions underpinning routine
practice. Implementation was also logistically demanding, and therapists felt
they had little agency to vary what was locally conventional for their service.
In addition, achieving coherence took considerable relational work.
Non-traditional interventions were often difficult to explain to children and
parents, involved culturally uncomfortable repetitive drills and required
therapists to do more tailoring of intervention for individual children.
CONCLUSIONS: The intervention coherence framework has practical and theoretical
applications. It is designed to help therapists, services and researchers
anticipate and address barriers to achieving coherence when implementing
non-routine interventions. It also represents a worked example of using theory to
make intervention description both user-focused and implementation-friendly.

DOI: 10.1186/s43058-021-00159-0 
PMCID: PMC8157687
PMID: 34039444 


41. Indian J Palliat Care. 2021 Jan-Mar;27(1):47-53. doi: 10.4103/IJPC.IJPC_112_20.
Epub 2021 Feb 17.

The Role of Family Caregiver's Sense of Coherence and Family Adaptation
Determinants in Predicting Distress and Caregiver Burden in Families of Cancer
Patients.

Mirsoleymani S(1), Matbouei M(2)(3), Vasli P(2), Marzaleh MA(4)(5)(6)(7), Rohani 
C(2)(8).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, The University of
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(2)Department of Community Health Nursing, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Student Research Committee, Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery,
Semnan University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Research Center for Health Management of Mass Gathering, Red Crescent Society 
of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Research Center for Emergency and Disaster Resilience, Red Crescent Society of
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Student Research Committee, Department of Health in Disasters and Emergencies,
Health Human Resources Research Center, School of Management and Medical
Informatics, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(7)Health Policy Research Center, Institute of Health, Shiraz University of
Medical Sciences, Fars, Iran.
(8)Ersta Sköndal Bräcke University College, Campus Ersta, Stockholm, Sweden.

Background: Most cancer patients' families suffer from maladaptation which
increases family distress and caregiving burden. This study was conducted to
explore the relationship between these maladaptation indicators, and the sense of
coherence (SOC) of family caregivers alongside other family resilience determines
among family caregivers of cancer patients.
Methods: A total of 104 family caregivers of cancer patients were included in
this cross-sectional study. They answered three questionnaires to assess family
resilience factors: Family Inventory of Resources for Management (FIRM), Family
Crisis Oriented Personal Evaluation Scales (F-COPES), and SOC scale. In addition,
family maladaptation factors were determined by two instruments, including Family
Distress Index (FDI) and Caregiver Burden Inventory (CBI).
Results: The results of this study showed that the FIRM and the SOC together were
responsible for 35% and 43% of the variances in FDI and CBI scores, respectively 
(P < 0.001). "Reframing", the subscale of the F-COPES, significantly predicted
the variances of FDI (β = -0.26, P = 0.01) and CBI scores (β = -0.21, P = 0.04). 
Moreover, "Mastery and health", the subscale of the FIRM, significantly predicted
the variances of FDI (β = -0.38, P < 0.01) and CBI scores (β = -0.21, P = 0.02).
Conclusions: Family caregiver's SOC alongside other family resilience
determinants plays a significant role in alleviating family distress and
caregiver burden. It is suggested that palliative care providers consider family 
caregivers' SOC in developing a psychological intervention plan to improve family
resilience in families of cancer patients.

Copyright: © 2021 Indian Journal of Palliative Care.

DOI: 10.4103/IJPC.IJPC_112_20 
PMCID: PMC8121216
PMID: 34035617 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


42. J Clin Nurs. 2021 May 20. doi: 10.1111/jocn.15812. [Epub ahead of print]

'I want to get back!' A qualitative study of long-term critically ill patients'
inner strength and willpower: Back home after long-term intensive care.

Alexandersen I(1)(2), Haugdahl HS(1)(3), Stjern B(1), Paulsby TE(1), Lund SB(1), 
Haugan G(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Nursing, NTNU Norwegian University of Science 
and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
(2)St. Olav University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.
(3)Nord-Trøndelag Hospital Trust, Levanger, Norway.
(4)Faculty of Nursing and Health Sciences, Nord University, Levanger, Norway.

AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: To provide insights into what promotes and challenges inner 
strength and willpower in formerly critically ill patients back home after a
long-term ICU stay.
BACKGROUND: Critically ill patients demand great resources during an ICU stay,
some experience great challenges after discharge from hospital. Knowledge about
how health professionals can promote former long-term critically ill patients'
inner strength and willpower after discharge is essential, but still missing.
DESIGN: A qualitative, hermeneutic-phenomenological approach using in-depth
interviews with former long-term ICU patients.
METHODS: Seventeen long-term ICU patients were interviewed 6-20 months after ICU 
discharge. The consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research was used 
(COREQ,2007).
RESULTS: Back home after hospital discharge, some former patients coped well
while others suffered heavy burdens mentally and physically, along with economic 
problems. They handled their challenges differently: some found comfort and
insight by reading their diary written by their ICU nurses, while several were
struggling alone experiencing a lonesome silent suffering; these called for a
follow-up support by the healthcare system.
CONCLUSION: Long-term ICU patients' inner strength and willpower are vital
salutogenic resources supporting the fight back to one's former independent life.
However, physical, mental and economic challenges drain their inner strength to
go on and succeed. Several long-term ICU patients need health-promoting follow-up
support after hospital discharge.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: This study disclosed a lonely and silent
suffering indicating a need for development of systematical health-promoting
follow-up programmes including salutogenic components such as health-promoting
conversations, diaries and web-based recovery programme along with a cell phone
app.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jocn.15812 
PMID: 34018274 


43. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2021 May 19. doi: 10.1007/s00127-021-02098-6.
[Epub ahead of print]

The genetic background of the associations between sense of coherence and mental 
health, self-esteem and personality.

Silventoinen K(1), Vuoksimaa E(2), Volanen SM(3)(4), Palviainen T(2), Rose RJ(5),
Suominen S(6)(7), Kaprio J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Social Sciences, Department of Social Research, University of
Helsinki, P.O. Box 18, N00014, Helsinki, Finland. karri.silventoinen@helsinki.fi.
(2)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), HiLIFE, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Clinicum, Department of Public Health, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.
(5)Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington,
IN, USA.
(6)Department of Public Health, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(7)School of Health Sciences, University of Skövde, Skövde, Sweden.

PURPOSE: Sense of coherence (SOC) represents coping and can be considered an
essential component of mental health. SOC correlates with mental health and
personality, but the background of these associations is poorly understood. We
analyzed the role of genetic factors behind the associations of SOC with mental
health, self-esteem and personality using genetic twin modeling and polygenic
scores (PGS).
METHODS: Information on SOC (13-item Orientation of Life Questionnaire), four
mental health indicators, self-esteem and personality (NEO Five Factor Inventory 
Questionnaire) was collected from 1295 Finnish twins at 20-27 years of age.
RESULTS: In men and women, SOC correlated negatively with depression,
alexithymia, schizotypal personality and overall mental health problems and
positively with self-esteem. For personality factors, neuroticism was associated 
with weaker SOC and extraversion, agreeableness and conscientiousness with
stronger SOC. All these psychological traits were influenced by genetic factors
with heritability estimates ranging from 19 to 66%. Genetic and environmental
factors explained these associations, but the genetic correlations were generally
stronger. The PGS of major depressive disorder was associated with weaker, and
the PGS of general risk tolerance with stronger SOC in men, whereas in women the 
PGS of subjective well-being was associated with stronger SOC and the PGSs of
depression and neuroticism with weaker SOC.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that a substantial proportion of genetic
variation in SOC is shared with mental health, self-esteem and personality
indicators. This suggests that the correlations between these traits reflect a
common neurobiological background rather than merely the influence of external
stressors.

DOI: 10.1007/s00127-021-02098-6 
PMID: 34009445 


44. BMC Health Serv Res. 2021 May 18;21(1):471. doi: 10.1186/s12913-021-06465-6.

The combination of psychosocial working conditions, occupational balance and
sociodemographic characteristics and their associations with no or negligible
stress symptoms among Swedish occupational therapists - a cross-sectional study.

Håkansson C(1), Lexén A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden. Carita.hakansson@med.lu.se.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The numbers of people who are on sick leave due to mental health
problems, such as exhaustion disorder, are increasing in Sweden. One of the most 
affected groups is healthcare professionals. In order to develop preventive
strategies to promote a sustainable working life for occupational therapists,
there is a need to understand the associations between psychosocial working
conditions, occupational balance and no or negligible stress symptoms. To the
best of our knowledge, neither the combination of these factors nor the
salutogenic perspective, have been taken into consideration when exploring
factors associated with stress symptoms among occupational therapists in previous
research.
METHODS: Purposeful sampling was used. All currently working members of the
Swedish Association of Occupational Therapists were invited to take part in the
present study in 2018. The final sample was 3658 (48% response rate). A
web-survey with questions about signs of exhaustion, psychosocial working
conditions, occupational balance and sociodemographic characteristics was used.
Logistic regression analyses were used in order to calculate associations between
psychosocial working conditions, occupational balance, sociodemographic
characteristics and no or negligible signs of exhaustion.
RESULTS: Experiencing high occupational balance, low workload, high control, high
sense of community and high justice, were associated with no or negligible stress
symptoms. Furthermore, a satisfying financial situation, having children living
at home, being married and long professional experience were significant in this 
model.
CONCLUSIONS: It seems important to consider not only psychosocial working
conditions, but also occupational balance to prevent exhaustion disorder among
occupational therapists in Sweden. Organisational programmes, which reduce the
workload, strengthen the control and sense of community and facilitate
occupational balance, seem to be important areas for health promotion in this
group.

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-021-06465-6 
PMCID: PMC8130391
PMID: 34006285  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Int J Soc Psychiatry. 2021 May 13:207640211017586. doi:
10.1177/00207640211017586. [Epub ahead of print]

A nationwide web-based survey of factors associated with depressive symptoms
among Japanese workers.

Saito S(1), Qi R(2), Tran HTT(2), Suzuki K(2), Takiguchi T(2), Noto S(3), Ohde
S(1)(4), Takahashi O(1)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical Epidemiology and Health Technology Assessment, St. Luke's 
International University, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Field of Health Informatics and Business Administration, Graduate School,
Niigata University of Health and Welfare, Niigata, Japan.
(3)Department of Occupational Therapy, Niigata University of Health and Welfare, 
Niigata, Japan.
(4)Graduate School of Public Health, St. Luke's International University, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(5)Department of General Internal Medicine, St. Luke's International Hospital,
Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Precarious employment has affected mental health, and limited data
are available on the association of low stress tolerance with depressive symptoms
among Japanese workers.
AIMS: This study aimed to examine the relationship between stress tolerance and
depressive symptoms among Japanese workers, including company employees, civil
servants and self-employed persons in various industries.
METHODS: We conducted a nationwide cross-sectional study. From March 26 to April 
6, 2020, we performed a web-based survey of Japanese workers. The questionnaire
included questions on socioeconomic factors, the SOC scale that assesses stress
tolerance, the CES-D, and the EQ-5D-5L. Multivariate regression analyses were
performed to determine the factors associated with depressive symptoms.
RESULTS: We included 3,001 participants in the analysis. A high SOC score,
adequate sleeping time and frequency of exercise were associated with higher
depressive symptoms. Employment status and long working hours were not associated
with depressive symptoms. Younger workers had lower SOC scores than older
workers. An inverse correlation between the SOC score and CES-D score was found
among Japanese workers.
CONCLUSIONS: Improving stress tolerance among younger workers is needed to
prevent worsening mental health regardless of employment status for Japanese
workers.

DOI: 10.1177/00207640211017586 
PMID: 33985382 


46. Scand J Public Health. 2021 May 12:14034948211011812. doi:
10.1177/14034948211011812. [Epub ahead of print]

Job strain and sense of coherence: Associations with stress-related outcomes
among teachers.

Ramberg J(1), Låftman SB(2), Nilbrink J(2), Olsson G(2), Toivanen S(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Special Education, Stockholm University, Sweden.
(2)Department of Public Health Sciences, Centre for Health Equity Studies
(CHESS), Stockholm University/Karolinska Institutet, Sweden.
(3)School of Health, Care and Social Welfare, Mälardalen University, Sweden.

Background: Teachers constitute an occupational group experiencing high levels of
stress and with high sick-leave rates. Therefore, examining potentially
protective factors is important. While prior research has mainly focused on the
link between teachers' own experiences of their work environment and
stress-related outcomes, it is also possible that colleagues' perception of the
work environment and their possibilities for dealing with work-related stress
contribute to influencing individual teachers' stress. Aim: The aim of this study
was to investigate how teachers' reports of high job strain (i.e. high demands
and low control) and sense of coherence (SOC), as well as the concentration of
colleagues reporting high strain and high SOC, were associated with perceived
stress and depressed mood. Methods: The data were derived from the Stockholm
Teacher Survey, with information from two cross-sectional web surveys performed
in 2014 and in 2016 (N=2732 teachers in 205 school units). Two-level random
intercept linear regression models were performed. Results: High job strain at
the individual level was associated with higher levels of perceived stress and
depressed mood, but less so for individuals with high SOC. Furthermore, a greater
proportion of colleagues reporting high SOC was associated with lower levels of
perceived stress and depressed mood at the individual level. Conclusions: High
SOC may be protective against work-related stress among teachers. Additionally,
the proportion of colleagues reporting high SOC was related to less individual
stress, suggesting a protective effect of school-level collective SOC.

DOI: 10.1177/14034948211011812 
PMID: 33977811 


47. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2021 May 10;16(1):209. doi: 10.1186/s13023-021-01827-z.

Validating online approaches for rare disease research using latent class mixture
modeling.

Dwyer AA(1)(2), Zeng Z(3), Lee CS(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Boston College Connell School of Nursing, Chestnut Hill, MA, USA.
andrew.dwyer@bc.edu.
(2)Massachusetts General Hospital - Harvard Center for Reproductive Medicine,
Boston, MA, USA. andrew.dwyer@bc.edu.
(3)Boston College Lynch School of Education and Human Development, Center for
Measurement, Evaluation, Statistics and Assessment, Chestnut Hill, MA, USA.
(4)Boston College Connell School of Nursing, Chestnut Hill, MA, USA.
(5)Eileen O'Connor Institute of Nursing Research, Australian Catholic University,
Melbourne, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Rare disease patients are geographically dispersed, posing challenges
to research. Some researchers have partnered with patient organizations and used 
web-based approaches to overcome geographic recruitment barriers. Critics of such
methods claim that samples are homogenous and do not represent the broader
patient population-as patients recruited from patient organizations are thought
to have high levels of needs. We applied latent class mixture modeling (LCMM) to 
define patient clusters based on underlying characteristics. We used previously
collected data from a cohort of patients with congenital hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism who were recruited online in collaboration with a patient
organization. Patient demographics, clinical information, Revised Illness
Perception Questionnaire (IPQ-R) scores and Zung self-rating depression Scale
(SDS) were used as variables for LCMM analysis. Specifically, we aimed to test
the classic critique that patients recruited online in collaboration with a
patient organization are a homogenous group with high needs. We hypothesized that
distinct classes (clinical profiles) of patients could be identified-thereby
demonstrating the validity of online recruitment and supporting transferability
of findings.
RESULTS: In total, 154 patients with CHH were included. The LCMM analysis
identified three distinct subgroups (Class I: n = 84 [54.5%], Class II: n = 41
[26.6%], Class III: n = 29 [18.8%]) that differed significantly in terms of age, 
education, disease consequences, emotional consequences, illness coherence and
depression symptoms (all p < 0.001) as well as age at diagnosis (p = 0.045).
Classes depict a continuum of psychosocial impact ranging from severe to
relatively modest. Additional analyses revealed later diagnosis (Class I:
19.2 ± 6.7 years [95% CI 17.8-20.7]) is significantly associated with worse
psychological adaptation and coping as assessed by disease consequences,
emotional responses, making sense of one's illness and SDS depressive symptoms
(all p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: We identify three distinct classes of patients who were recruited
online in collaboration with a patient organization. Findings refute prior
critiques of patient partnership and web-based recruitment for rare disease
research. This is the first empirical data suggesting negative psychosocial
sequelae of later diagnosis ("diagnostic odyssey") often observed in CHH.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-021-01827-z 
PMCID: PMC8108361
PMID: 33971926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Front Public Health. 2021 Apr 22;9:652998. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.652998.
eCollection 2021.

Pick the Freshmen Up for a "Healthy Study Start" Evaluation of a Health Promoting
Onboarding Program for First Year Students at the Carinthia University of Applied
Sciences, Austria.

Limarutti A(1)(2), Maier MJ(3), Mir E(1), Gebhard D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences and Social Work, Carinthia University of Applied
Sciences, Spittal an der Drau, Austria.
(2)Department of Human Sciences, University of Education Schwäbisch Gmünd,
Shwäbisch Gmünd, Germany.
(3)Independent Researcher, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Faculty of Sports and Health Sciences, Technical University of Munich, Munich,
Germany.

Introduction: Universities are an essential setting for creating health promoting
environments. Evidence shows that university life can pose various threats to the
students' health. Especially first year students are vulnerable to mental health 
issues. To support well-being and prevent psychological distress from the first
day of studying, onboarding programs are needed to promote the students' health
and their self- and social competencies. The study demonstrates a tailored
multi-component onboarding intervention program named "Healthy Study Start." An
evaluation of the effectiveness is presented focusing on outcomes regarding the
students' sense of coherence (S-SoC), social support, sympathy, the work-related 
collective and the participative safety (a sub-scale of the team climate) among
freshmen at the Carinthia University of Applied Sciences (CUAS, Austria).
Methods: For the analyses, a quantitative controlled study design was used and
results were measured three times. The intervention group (n = 72) was composed
of freshmen selected from the bachelor study programs Occupational Therapy,
Speech and Language Therapy, Biomedical Science and Radiologic Technology.
Freshmen from the bachelor study program Healthcare and Nursing formed the
control group (n = 81). As the requirements for analyses of variance were not
fulfilled, the data had to be analyzed using e.g., Mann-Whitney U-tests. Results:
Significant changes (all p < 0.016) between the two groups were found between
T0/T1, and between T0/T2. Furthermore, changes within the intervention group (all
p < 0.016) emerged in nearly all outcomes between T0/T1, while within the control
group no changes were identified. However, the intervention group had
statistically significantly higher values in the majority of outcomes at T1 and
T2 compared to the control group. Conclusion: The onboarding program "Healthy
Study Start" shows how an initiative at the beginning of their studies can
support students in entering a new phase of their lives. The results indicate a
positive effect on the students' self- and social competencies. However,
students' health promotion is not only an investment for a health conscious
university or an enhanced employability. Especially in health-related fields of
study, students are future multipliers and play an essential role in implementing
health promotion concepts for clients, patients and employees.

Copyright © 2021 Limarutti, Maier, Mir and Gebhard.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.652998 
PMCID: PMC8100034
PMID: 33968887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


49. Cardiovasc Diagn Ther. 2021 Apr;11(2):591-601. doi: 10.21037/cdt-20-610.

Narrative view of the role of health promotion and salutogenesis in the treatment
of chronic disease: viability and value for the care of cardiovascular
conditions.

Röhrich C(1), Giordano J(2), Kohls NB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division Health Promotion, University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Coburg,
Coburg, Germany.
(2)Departments of Neurology and Biochemistry, and Pellegrino Center for Clinical 
Bioethics, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA.

Health promotion provides a complementary scientific and practical approach to
medicine, which may help to create, maintain and restore wellness even in the
presence of disease and illness. Salutogenesis, as key concept, focuses upon the 
emergence of health and thus, leads to fortifying individuals' and communities'
health determinants and resources. The potential integration of health promotion 
and medicine can contribute to a more person-centred focus of integrative care to
address and realize individuals' health potential and needs, rather than merely
an emphasis upon the underlying disease, such as congenital heart diseases. We
posit that it is possible-and advisable-to address lifestyle modification
aspects, and to change the focus of therapeutic encounters and health care
programs to be more tailored to and aligned with individual needs, demands and
expectations. By adopting a health promotional approach to the individual patient
as person, their subjective biography, narrative and lifeworld can serve as
resources for developing more beneficial coping styles, resilience and
trajectories for personal growth over the life span, despite the occurrence and
durability of chronic conditions, such as long-term cardiovascular disease.
Implications, important contingencies and requirements for education and training
of health-care professionals are addressed, as they are key issues that may
affect the successful development and engagement of health promotion programs
within health care systems at-large.

2021 Cardiovascular Diagnosis and Therapy. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/cdt-20-610 
PMCID: PMC8102269
PMID: 33968636 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have completed
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/cdt-20-610). The series “Current Management Aspects in
Adult Congenital Heart Disease (ACHD): Part III” was commissioned by the
editorial office without any funding or sponsorship. The authors have no other
conflicts of interest to declare.


50. J Clin Nurs. 2021 May 7. doi: 10.1111/jocn.15833. [Epub ahead of print]

Perception of family sense of coherence among Chinese couples with infertility.

Ngai FW(1), Lam W(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon,
Hong Kong SAR.

AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: To explore perceptions of family sense of coherence among
infertile couples and to provide a theoretical interpretation of the
comprehensibility, manageability and meaningfulness of couples' experiences
coping with infertility.
BACKGROUND: Infertility is a devastating experience for many couples and can have
long-lasting psychosocial consequences. Family sense of coherence has the
potential to facilitate a couple's adjustment to the life crisis of infertility
and may provide a useful conceptual lens to understand experiences of
infertility.
METHODS: Sixty-four couples with infertility participated in semi-structured
interviews at subfertility clinics. Data were analysed using the constant
comparative approach of grounded theory. COREQ guidelines were followed in
reporting the study.
RESULTS: Three major themes related to infertility emerged from the interviews:
comprehensibility, manageability and meaningfulness. The couples experienced
psychological strain while making cognitive sense of infertility. The
significance of children, which is embedded in traditional Chinese culture,
created a sense of meaning and purpose in couples' lives and motivated them to
mobilise both internal and external resources to cope with the demands of
infertility and its treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings indicate that the salutogenic model of family sense of 
coherence can contribute to our understanding of the experiences of infertility
among Chinese couples.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: The results offer a theoretical framework that
healthcare professionals can use to help couples cope with the life crisis of
infertility by strengthening their sense of family coherence.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jocn.15833 
PMID: 33963632 


51. J Health Organ Manag. 2021 Apr 29;35(9):163-177. doi: 10.1108/JHOM-07-2020-0290.

Nursing assistant's perceptions of the good work environment in municipal elderly
care in Sweden -a focus group study.

Maneschiöld PO(1), Lucaci-Maneschiöld D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Karlstad University, Karlstad, Sweden.
(2)University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this paper is to investigate aspects related to
difficulty to retain nursing assistants at nursing homes in Sweden related to
perceived work environment characteristics.
DESIGN/METHODOLOGY/APPROACH: To reveal aspects related to difficulty to retain
nursing assistants, the paper uses the BIKVA model, sense of coherence and New
Public Management (NPM). In total, three focus groups with nursing assistants at 
three nursing homes are interviewed with corresponding individual interviews with
their senior managers and users. The purpose is to analyze the situation from the
affected group of nursing assistants. The focus of this study is how nursing
assistants discuss related to recruit and retain nursing assistants at nursing
homes and elderly care and the response from senior management related to those
aspects.
FINDINGS: The main conclusions are that nursing assistants consider their job as 
meaningful, but limited latitude and direct involvement in managing their daily
tasks in a continuous communication with management affect negatively.
Furthermore and combined with wage levels, aspects related to scheduling, working
hours, shift work, split shifts and understaffing generate a burdensome and
stressful environment affecting the possibility to retain staff in a negative
direction.
ORIGINALITY/VALUE: The research uses a new approach utilizing the BIKVA model,
sense of coherence and NPM. The study shows that central in retaining nursing
assistants at nursing homes relates to aspects such as wages, staffing, shift
work and split shifts and continuous communication between nursing assistants and
management.

© Per-Ola Maneschiöld and Diana Lucaci-Maneschiöld.

DOI: 10.1108/JHOM-07-2020-0290 
PMID: 33960174 


52. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2021 May 6;12(1):275. doi: 10.1186/s13287-021-02351-4.

Mesenchymal stem and non-stem cell surgery, rescue, and regeneration in
glaucomatous optic neuropathy.

Limoli PG(1), Limoli C(1), Vingolo EM(2), Franzone F(2), Nebbioso M(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Low Vision Research Centre of Milan, Piazza Sempione 3, 20145, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Sense Organs, Faculty of Medicine and Odontology, Sapienza
University of Rome, P.le A. Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Sense Organs, Faculty of Medicine and Odontology, Sapienza
University of Rome, P.le A. Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy.
marcella.nebbioso@uniroma1.it.
(4)Department of Sense Organs, Ocular Electrophysiology Centre, Umberto I
Policlinic, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale del Policlinico 155, 00161, Rome, 
Italy. marcella.nebbioso@uniroma1.it.

BACKGROUND: Glaucomatous optic neuropathy (GON) is an anatomofunctional
impairment of the optic nerve triggered by glaucoma. Recently, growth factors
(GFs) have been shown to produce retinal neuroenhancement. The suprachoroidal
autograft of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) by the Limoli retinal restoration
technique (LRRT) has proven to achieve retinal neuroenhancement by producing GF
directly into the choroidal space. This retrospectively registered clinical study
investigated the visual function changes in patients with GON treated with LRRT.
METHODS: Twenty-five patients (35 eyes) with GON in progressive disease
conditions were included in the study. Each patient underwent a comprehensive
ocular examination, including the analysis of best corrected visual acuity (BCVA)
for far and near visus, sensitivity by Maia microperimetry, and the study of the 
spectral domain-optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT). The patients were divided 
into two groups: a control group, consisting of 21 eyes (average age 72.2 years, 
range 50-83), and an LRRT group, consisting of 14 eyes (average age 67.4, range
50-84).
RESULTS: After 6 months, the BCVA, close-up visus, and microperimetric
sensitivity significantly improved in the LRRT-treated group (p<0.05), whereas
the mean increases were not statistically significant in controls (p>0.5).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with GON treated with LRRT showed a significant increase in
visual performance (VP) both in BCVA and sensitivity and an improvement of
residual close-up visus, in the comparison between the LRRT results and the
control group. Further studies will be needed to establish the actual
significance of the reported findings.

DOI: 10.1186/s13287-021-02351-4 
PMCID: PMC8101217
PMID: 33957957 


53. Eur Eat Disord Rev. 2021 Jul;29(4):657-662. doi: 10.1002/erv.2837. Epub 2021 May 
6.

Eating behaviour and symptom trajectories in patients with a history of binge
eating disorder during COVID-19 pandemic.

Giel KE(1), Schurr M(1), Zipfel S(1), Junne F(1), Schag K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, Medical University
Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: A history of an eating disorder (ED) might constitute a risk for
symptom deterioration and relapse during COVID-19 pandemic. This longitudinal
study investigates ED symptom trajectories until the first COVID-19 lockdown in
Spring 2020 in patients with a history of binge eating disorder (BED).
METHOD: Participants of the randomised-controlled BED treatment trial IMPULS
participated in a re-assessment directly after the first COVID-19 lockdown in
Germany. We used expert-rated clinical interviews and self-report to investigate 
binge eating (BE) frequency, ED and general psychopathology, distress, emotion
regulation and sense of coherence. Symptom trajectories were analysed for
baseline when entering the trial, end of trial participation and the time point
directly after lockdown. BE frequency was assessed on a recall basis for 4 weeks 
directly before lockdown and 4 weeks during lockdown.
RESULTS: BE frequency, general ED pathology and depressive symptoms markedly
increased after as compared to before the COVID-19 outbreak. Individuals scoring 
high on reappraisal as emotion regulation strategy and sense of coherence scored 
lower on general ED pathology.
CONCLUSION: Individuals with a history of an ED are at risk for symptom
deterioration and relapse during the pandemic. Intervention and service
dissemination strategies are needed to support vulnerable groups throughout the
pandemic.

© 2021 The Authors. European Eating Disorders Review published by Eating
Disorders Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/erv.2837 
PMCID: PMC8206923
PMID: 33955610  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nurs Open. 2021 May 4. doi: 10.1002/nop2.886. [Epub ahead of print]

Nurses' sense of coherence and stress management strategies against the types of 
health status.

Betke K(1), Basińska MA(2), Andruszkiewicz A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Torun Ludwik
Rydygier Collegium Medicum in Bydgoszcz, Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(2)Faculty of Psychology, Kazimierz Wielki University in Bydgoszcz, Bydgoszcz,
Poland.

AIM: The main objective of this paper was to establish types of health status in 
the group of practicing nurses.
DESIGN: Positive psychology defines human health as the underlying resource for
all life activities, including professional work. Practicing nurses are exposed
to a variety of professional pressures, most notably high-stress burden.
Long-term functioning in conditions of work-related overburden and stress may
compromise the health status of nurses and make them vulnerable to somatic or
psychosomatic conditions.
METHODS: In this study, we used original worksheets for collecting socio-economic
data and health-related data, Orientation to Life Questionnaire (SOC-29), General
Health Questionnaire (GHQ-28), Brief COPE Inventory (Mini-COPE) and the somatic
symptom scale. K-means clustering analysis for cases was used to identify types
of health status among the surveyed nurses.
RESULTS: This survey discovered that specific types of health status can be
distinguished among practicing nurses. The nurses represented various types of
health status, levels of the sense of coherence and the use of stress management 
strategies.

© 2021 The Authors. Nursing Open published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/nop2.886 
PMID: 33942554 


55. BMC Oral Health. 2021 May 4;21(1):73. doi: 10.1186/s12903-020-01324-y.

Early childhood caries: Are maternal psychosocial factors, decision-making
ability, and caries status risk indicators for children in a sub-urban Nigerian
population?

Alade M(1), Folayan MO(2), El Tantawi M(3), Oginni AB(4), Adeniyi AA(5),
Finlayson TL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Obafemi Awolowo University Teaching Hospitals' Complex, Ile-Ife, Nigeria.
(2)Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife, Nigeria. toyinukpong@yahoo.co.uk.
(3)Faculty of Dentistry, Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt.
(4)Innovative Aid, Abuja, Nigeria.
(5)Lagos State University College of Medicine, Ikeja, Nigeria.
(6)School of Public Health, San Diego State University, San Diego, CA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Early childhood caries (ECC) is caries in children below the age of
72 months. The aim of the study was to determine the association of maternal
psychosocial factors (general anxiety, dental anxiety, sense of coherence,
parenting stress, fatalism, social support, depressive symptoms, and executive
dysfunction), decision-making abilities, education, income and caries status with
the prevalence and severity of ECC among children resident in Ile-Ife, Nigeria.
METHODS: A dataset of 1549 mother-child (6-71-months-old) dyads collected through
examinations and a household survey, using validated psychometric tools to
measure the psychosocial factors, were analyzed. The DMFT for the mothers and the
dmft for the child were determined. The association between maternal psychosocial
factors, education, income, and decision-making ability, the prevalence of
maternal caries, and the prevalence of ECC was determined using logistic
regression analysis.
RESULTS: The prevalence of maternal caries was 3.3%, and the mean (standard
deviation-SD) DMFT was 0.10 (0.76). The ECC prevalence was 4.3%, and the mean
(SD) dmft was 0.13 (0.92). There was no significant difference between the
prevalence and severity of maternal caries and ECC by maternal age, education,
income, or decision-making abilities. There was also no significant difference in
maternal caries, ECC prevalence and ECC severity by maternal psychosocial
factors. The only significant association was between the prevalence of caries in
the mother and children: children whose mothers had caries were over six times
more likely to have ECC than were children with mothers who had no caries (AOR:
6.67; 95% CI 3.23-13.79; p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The significant association between ECC and maternal caries
prevalence suggests that prenatal oral health care for mothers may reduce the
risk for ECC.

DOI: 10.1186/s12903-020-01324-y 
PMCID: PMC8094474
PMID: 33941156  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Health Expect. 2021 May 2. doi: 10.1111/hex.13271. [Epub ahead of print]

Health-care professionals' assessment of a person-centred intervention to empower
self-management and health across chronic illness: Qualitative findings from a
process evaluation study.

Heggdal K(1), Mendelsohn JB(2), Stepanian N(2), Oftedal BF(3), Larsen MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lovisenberg Diaconal University College, Oslo, Norway.
(2)College of Health Professions, Pace University, New York, NY, USA.
(3)University of Stavanger, Stavanger, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Person-centred care (PCC) empowers patients to manage their chronic
illness and promote their health in accordance with their own beliefs, values and
preferences. Drawing on health-care professional's (HCP's) experiences
implementing an empowerment-focused, person-centred intervention called the
Bodyknowledging Program (BKP), we undertook a process evaluation that aimed to
assess the impact on patient health and well-being.
METHODS: We used individual in-depth interviews and semi-structured focus groups 
comprising n = 8 interprofessional HCP who facilitated intervention sessions with
n = 58 patients situated in Norwegian specialist care sites. Content analysis was
used to analyse the data and summarize major themes.
RESULTS: Health-care professional interviews revealed four main ways in which the
intervention operated in support of health-related patient outcomes: (i)
addressing the whole person; (ii) hope and affirmation; (iii) expanding recovery;
and (iv) social support and revitalized relationships. The intervention provided 
new tools for patients to understand the social, emotional and physical impact of
their illness. Health-care professional reported new insights to facilitate
patient engagement and to promote patients' health.
CONCLUSIONS: The Bodyknowledging Program facilitated patient engagement through
the promotion of patient-centred care while developing the patients' ability to
exploit their own resources for effectively managing their health within illness.
The process evaluation supported the underlying theoretical basis of the
intervention and was suggestive of its potential transferability elsewhere.

© 2021 The Authors. Health Expectations published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/hex.13271 
PMID: 33934447 


57. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. 2021 May 1. doi: 10.1111/cdoe.12653. [Epub ahead
of print]

Dental caries and psychosocial factors: Testing a conceptual model in
adolescents.

Baxevanos K(1), Menexes G(2), Lazaridou A(3), Coolidge T(4), Topitsoglou V(1),
Kalfas S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Dentistry, Periodontology, and Implant Biology,
Faculty of Health Sciences, School of Dentistry, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(2)Laboratory of Agronomy, School of Agriculture, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Oral Health Sciences, School of Dentistry, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, USA.

OBJECTIVES: A conceptual model was designed to examine interrelations among
psychosocial factors, oral health behaviour, and dental caries in a sample of
adolescents.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study design of 531 Greek families included an oral
examination and a survey completed by adolescents, and a survey completed by
mothers. The outcome measure was dental caries experience. Additionally, dental
sealants were recorded. The participants provided information which comprised the
Sense of Coherence (SoC) scale and 11 psychosocial and behavioural variables that
formed 6 composite variables (life-course experiences, socio-economic status,
perceived parental support, perceived parental punishment, preventive measures,
sugar intake frequency). The composite variables of preventive measures and sugar
intake formed the latent variable of oral health behaviour. The interrelations of
the above factors were included in a conceptual model and tested using a
Structural Equation Modelling analysis.
RESULTS: Data fit the proposed conceptual model (χ2  = 23.338, df = 14, P = .055,
RMSEA = 0.036). Among psychosocial variables, adolescent's SoC was the best
predictor of both dental caries (Standardized Regression Coefficient - Std.
RC ± Standard Error (SE) = -0.178 ± 0.04) and oral health behaviour (Std.
RC ± SE = -0.378 ± 0.09). All psychosocial factors were associated with SoC (Std.
RCs ± SE between -0.162 ± 0.04 and 0.211 ± 0.04) and via SoC with oral health
behaviour (Std. RCs ± SE between -0.080 ± 0.03 and 0.061 ± 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: A conceptual model was tested that integrated SoC with the
psychosocial factors theoretically shaping it and clarified all factors'
predictive abilities on dental caries via oral health behaviour.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cdoe.12653 
PMID: 33932046 


58. Qual Health Res. 2021 Apr 30:10497323211008848. doi: 10.1177/10497323211008848.
[Epub ahead of print]

Mobility-A Bridge to Sense of Coherence in Everyday Life: Older Patients'
Experiences of Participation in an Exercise Program During the First 3 Weeks
After Hip Fracture Surgery.

Vestøl I(1), Debesay J(1), Bergland A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oslo Metropolitan University, Oslo, Norway.

Our aim with this article was to explore the experiences of older people who
participated in the evidence-based High-Intensity Functional Exercise (HIFE)
Program during the first 3 weeks of rehabilitation after hip fracture surgery.
Nineteen older people participated in the study. Data were analyzed using
systematic text condensation. One overarching theme "Exercise is the key for
regaining mobility and a sense of coherence (SOC) in everyday life" emerged from 
the analysis in addition to these five themes: (a) understanding the existential 
importance of mobility; (b) maintaining a positive self-image by regaining
mobility; (c) regaining one's old life and independence in everyday living; (d)
maintaining interpersonal relationships through mobility; and (e) creating
positive emotions by being able to move. The findings highlight the importance of
exercise as a strategy for regaining mobility, illustrated by the essential role 
it played in the participants' lives after suffering a hip fracture.

DOI: 10.1177/10497323211008848 
PMID: 33926333 


59. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Apr 26;18(9). pii: 4572. doi:
10.3390/ijerph18094572.

Physical Activity and the Emotional State of Physiotherapy Students Who Finish
Their Education.

Kowalska J(1), Wójtowicz D(1), Szczepańska-Gieracha J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiotherapy, University School of Physical Education, 51-612
Wroclaw, Poland.

This study aimed to evaluate the emotional state and the level of the sense of
coherence in the context of physical activity among physiotherapy students and
investigate how the participating students' emotional state changed after two
years of studying and what factors were associated with the mood disorders. The
study group consisted of 110 students-79 female and 31 male. The Back Depression 
Inventory (BDI), the Sense of Coherence Questionnaire (SOC-29) and the Perceived 
Stress Questionnaire (PSQ) were used. The results presented an increase in
depressive symptoms during the studies of a group of physiotherapy students.
Physical activity can play a protective role in the prevention and treatment of
mood disorders. The students who regularly engaged in physical activity exhibited
better mood, a lower perceived stress level and a higher level of the sense of
coherence as compared to the physically inactive students.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18094572 
PMCID: PMC8123397
PMID: 33925832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Apr 23;18(9). pii: 4508. doi:
10.3390/ijerph18094508.

Predictors of Adolescent Depressive Symptoms.

Malinauskiene V(1)(2), Malinauskas R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Studies, Institute of Cardiology, Lithuanian
University of Health Sciences, Sukileliu 17, 50157 Kaunas, Lithuania.
(2)Department of Physical and Social Education, Lithuanian Sports University,
Sporto 6, 44221 Kaunas, Lithuania.

The present study expands the existing literature and supplements today's
knowledge on the relationship between personal, psychosocial and lifestyle
factors and depressive symptoms among adolescents. The study aimed to investigate
the variety of depressive symptoms predictors-personal resources, adverse school 
and family, health, lifestyle-related (sense of coherence, self-esteem, school
involvement, negative acts at school, family stress and violence, psychosomatic
health complaints, physical activity, smoking, alcohol) as well as gender,
employing hierarchical linear regression analysis in a large representative
sample of adolescents (N = 2212) in Kaunas, Lithuania. Four blocks of predictors 
were employed in hierarchical linear regression analysis. In the final model
64.9% of depressive symptoms were explained by all the predictors. Sense of
coherence was the strongest predictor of depressive symptoms (standardized
regression coefficient β = -605, p < 0.001 in the first model and β = -263, p <
0.001 in the final model after adjustment for all other independent variables)
and accounted for 36.6% of variance. In conclusion, this study supports the
notion that depressive symptoms among adolescents have multifactorial origins
with many predictors showing significant effect seizes. Therefore, high sense of 
coherence and self-esteem, school involvement, higher levels of physical activity
would be protective and influence lower levels of depressive symptoms among
adolescents. Exposure to negative acts at school and negative experiences in the 
family, psychosomatic health complaints, smoking would increase the probability
of depressive symptoms. Girls are more prone to depression as compared to boys.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18094508 
PMCID: PMC8122983
PMID: 33922778  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Apr 11;18(8). pii: 4009. doi:
10.3390/ijerph18084009.

COVID-19 and Health Information Seeking Behavior: Digital Health Literacy Survey 
amongst University Students in Pakistan.

Zakar R(1), Iqbal S(2), Zakar MZ(3), Fischer F(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, University of the Punjab, Lahore 54590, Pakistan.
(2)Institute of Social and Cultural Studies, University of the Punjab, Lahore
54590, Pakistan.
(3)University of Okara, Okara 56300, Pakistan.
(4)Institute of Public Health, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10117 Berlin, 
Germany.
(5)Institute of Gerontological Health Services and Nursing Research,
Ravensburg-Weingarten University of Applied Sciences, 88250 Weingarten, Germany.

Amid the COVID-19 pandemic, digital health literacy (DHL) has become a
significant public health concern. This research aims to assess information
seeking behavior, as well as the ability to find relevant information and deal
with DHL among university students in Pakistan. An online-based cross-sectional
survey, using a web-based interviewing technique, was conducted to collect data
on DHL. Simple bivariate and multivariate linear regression was performed to
assess the association of key characteristics with DHL. The results show a high
DHL related to COVID-19 in 54.3% of students. Most of the Pakistani students
demonstrated ~50% DHL in all dimensions, except for reliability. Multivariate
findings showed that gender, sense of coherence and importance of information
were found to be significantly associated with DHL. However, a negative
association was observed with students' satisfaction with information. This led
to the conclusion that critical operational and navigations skills are essential 
to achieve COVID-19 DHL and cope with stress, particularly to promote both
personal and community health. Focused interventions and strategies should be
designed to enhance DHL amongst university students to combat the pandemic.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18084009 
PMCID: PMC8069684
PMID: 33920404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Apr 7;18(8). pii: 3857. doi:
10.3390/ijerph18083857.

The Impact of the Fourth Industrial Revolution on Managers' Sense of Coherence.

Mayer CH(1)(2), Wegerle C(1), Oosthuizen RM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial Psychology and People Management, College for
Business and Economics, University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg 2006, South
Africa.
(2)Kulturwissenschaftliche Fakultät, Europa Universität Viadrina, 15234
Frankfurt, Germany.
(3)Department of Industrial and Organisational Psychology, School of Management
Sciences, College of Economic and Management Sciences, University of South
Africa, Pretoria 0003, South Africa.

The Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) disrupts the world of work, new
technologies change the nature of individuals' work and their tasks, and
therefore it is necessary to determine how managers cope with these changes,
specifically relating to their salutogenesis. There is a lack of research
conducted on the salutogenesis of managers in times of the 4IR. The purpose of
this study is to investigate the level of managers' sense of coherence (SOC) in
terms of the adjustments and developments of the 4IR, and their in-depth
understanding of their SOC. This study employs a hermeneutical research design
with a qualitative approach by using a semi-structured interview. The method used
to analyze the data was content analysis. From the data analysis, the findings
indicate that a majority of the managers tend to have an understanding of the 4IR
and what implications of the 4IR will have on the world of work and their job
description, the necessary resources to cope with the 4IR, and find the 4IR
meaningful, therefore, managers have a strong SOC level during the 4IR. The
recommendations for future studies suggest that research could be conducted how
managers and lower-level managers' SOC differ, which will provide insight into
what different methods are required for the different level of managers.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18083857 
PMCID: PMC8067643
PMID: 33916953  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. SAGE Open Nurs. 2020 Dec 17;6:2377960820980361. doi: 10.1177/2377960820980361.
eCollection 2020 Jan-Dec.

How Elderly Residents in Nursing Homes Handle Loneliness-From the Nurses'
Perspective.

Naik MHSc P(1), Ueland PhD VI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Stavanger, Stavanger, Norway.

Introduction: Elderly people who leave their home environment and move to a
nursing home enter a phase in life with diminishing contact with family and
friends. This situation often results in a feeling of loneliness with a
concomitant deterioration in physical and mental health. By exploring the topic
through the lens of the nurses, this study takes a novel approach to address an
under-researched area in the nursing field.
Objective: The objective of the study was to identify, based on the nurses'
experience, how elderly residents handle loneliness in the nursing home.
Methods: This study used a qualitative explorative approach with data collected
through two focus group interviews with nine nurses at two elderly care
facilities in Norway. The resulting transcripts were examined using an approach
based on inductive content analysis.
Results: Three main categories emerged as crucial to help lonely nursing home
residents cope with day-to-day life: (i) maintaining ties to one's earlier life; 
(ii) engaging in recreational pursuits; and (iii) building new networks.
Conclusion: Analysing the findings based on sense of coherence (SOC) and
person-centred care (PCC) theories illustrates the importance of maintaining a
connection with both family and friends. To that point, having access to familiar
objects from their earlier life seemingly provides meaning to the residents by
bridging the past and the present. Recreational activities, ideally adapted to
each person's needs and ability, have a positive impact by providing structure
and meaning that help overtake feelings of loneliness. Building a new network
with fellow residents and staff imparts a sense of meaningful community belonging
and projects both dignity and self-worth.

© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1177/2377960820980361 
PMCID: PMC8047972
PMID: 33912665 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.


64. In Vivo. 2021 May-Jun;35(3):1881-1884. doi: 10.21873/invivo.12451.

Treatment of Capecitabine Corneal Side Effects With Autologous Blood-derived
Serum Eye Drops.

DI Staso F(1), Gattazzo I(2), Salimbeni BT(3), Lambiase A(4), Scuderi G(2), DI
Staso S(5), Ciancaglini M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology Unit, NESMOS Department, "Sapienza" University of Rome, Rome,
Italy; federico.distaso@gmail.com.
(2)Ophthalmology Unit, NESMOS Department, "Sapienza" University of Rome, Rome,
Italy.
(3)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, University of Rome, Rome,
Italy.
(4)Department of Sense Organs, Policlinico Umberto I, Sapienza University of
Rome, Rome, Italy.
(5)Ophthalmic Clinic, Department of Life, Health and Environmental Sciences,
University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.

BACKGROUND/AIM: To describe the clinical progress and management of ocular side
effects in a 35-year-old patient with metastatic breast cancer who underwent oral
chemotherapy with capecitabine and lapatinib.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Slit lamp evaluation revealed bilateral perikeratic
hyperemia, perilimbal conjunctival edema associated with corneal marginal
infiltrates and epithelial and anterior stromal defects in both eyes. Slit lamp
examination, in vivo confocal microscopy and anterior-segment optical coherence
tomography were highly suggestive for limbal stem cell deficiency. The decision
to administer autologous blood- derived serum eye drops was made.
RESULTS: Following administration of autologous blood-derived serum eye drops,
corneal marginal infiltrates, epithelial and stromal defects significantly
regressed in both eyes after only 10 days. Chemotherapy was resumed and serum eye
drops were prescribed simultaneously.
CONCLUSION: Autologous blood-derived serum eye drops may be an adequate
therapeutic choice for bilateral corneal lesions detected as ocular side effects 
of capecitabine.

Copyright© 2021, International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. George J.
Delinasios), All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21873/invivo.12451 
PMCID: PMC8193336
PMID: 33910876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. HeilberufeScience. 2021 Apr 20:1-9. doi: 10.1007/s16024-021-00351-1. [Epub ahead 
of print]

[I don't know whether I'm coming or going-Challenges of part-time students during
the COVID-19 pandemic].

[Article in German]

Limarutti A(1)(2), Flaschberger SS(1), Mir E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Studienbereich Gesundheit und Soziales, Fachhochschule Kärnten gemeinnützige
Privatstiftung, Hauptplatz 12, 9560 Feldkirchen i.K., Österreich.
(2)Institut für Humanwissenschaften, Pädagogische Hochschule Schwäbisch Gmünd,
Oberbettringer Str. 200, Schwäbisch Gmünd, 73525 Deutschland.

Background: Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, universities had to switch to online
teaching as quickly as possible. Part-time students who work in the healthcare
sector have to manage the balancing act between an invariably online education
and a mandatory physical attendance in a profession that maintains the system.
Aim: The aim of the study was to explore the challenges faced by part-time
students working in the healthcare sector, to identify the need for change and to
derive recommendations for action for the university.
Methods: The data were collected using an open response online questionnaire. The
obtained data were evaluated according to the qualitative content analysis of
Mayring.
Results: Probably the greatest challenges that part-time students have to deal
with, are the self-organized learning or the (on time) accomplishment of work
assignments, which are often perceived as too extensive, and the independent
development of teaching content. Furthermore, part-time students reported about
the difficultness to reconcile e‑learning and work and/or family.
Conclusion: These perceived challenges are not new but since additional family
commitments and uncertainty of daily work routine are added, these challenges are
gaining in importance during COVID-19. Therefore, learning environments, which
are currently offered to part-time students, must be understood as caring spaces.
In addition to new didactic concepts, universities should invest in the promotion
of students' personal and social competencies.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s16024-021-00351-1 
PMCID: PMC8056189
PMID: 33898155 


66. Front Psychol. 2021 Apr 9;12:646334. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.646334. eCollection 
2021.

Suffering and Salutogenesis: A Conceptual Analysis of Lessons for Psychiatry From
Existential Positive Psychology (PP2.0) in the Setting of the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Rajkumar RP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical
Education and Research, Pondicherry, India.

The COVID-19 pandemic has had a widespread effect on the thoughts, emotions and
behavior of millions of people all around the world. In this context, a large
body of scientific literature examining the mental health impact of this global
crisis has emerged. The majority of these studies have framed this impact in
terms of pre-defined categories derived from psychiatric nosology, such as
anxiety disorders, depression or post-traumatic stress disorder. These constructs
often fail to capture the complexity of the actual experiences of the individuals
being studied; more specifically, they describe these experiences exclusively in 
terms of disease, while neglecting their potentially adaptive or "salutogenic"
aspects. Similarly, discussion of psychological assistance for these individuals 
has largely been confined to a reiteration of "evidence-based" psychological or
pharmacological techniques which can be delivered using remote access technology.
In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, these approaches are likely to be of
mixed efficacy. Conversely, "negative emotions" or distressing psychological
experiences may actually be functional in the setting of a disaster or crisis,
serving to minimize harm, maximize social coherence and compliance, and
facilitate adherence to safety measures. The limitations of the "conventional"
approach are, to a certain degree, inherent to the prevailing medical model of
mental health. Beyond these considerations lies the concept of "salutogenesis," a
term which refers to the innate capacity of individuals to create and maintain
health and well-being in the face of adversity. Using principles derived from the
second wave of positive psychology (PP2.0), particularly its emphasis on the
totality of human experience and the possibility of deriving meaning and
character growth from suffering, this paper conceptually analyses the relevant
aspects of salutogenesis and PP2.0, and proposes an alternate approach for
addressing mental health concerns during the COVID-19 pandemic. Such an approach,
while acknowledging the utility of the conventional medical-psychotherapeutic
model in specific cases, reduces the risk of medicalizing human experience, and
provides individuals and communities with opportunities for growth and
adaptation. The benefits of this proposal could potentially extend far beyond the
current crisis, offering an opportunity for the field of psychiatry and mental
health research to move away from a purely "disease-centered" model.

Copyright © 2021 Rajkumar.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.646334 
PMCID: PMC8064119
PMID: 33897551 

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


67. Health Soc Care Community. 2021 Apr 24. doi: 10.1111/hsc.13397. [Epub ahead of
print]

Sense of coherence and burnout in nursing home workers during the COVID-19
pandemic in Spain.

Navarro Prados AB(1), Jiménez García-Tizón S(1), Meléndez JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Psicología Evolutiva y de la Educación, Facultad de
Psicología, Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Psicología Evolutiva y de la Educación, Facultad de
Psicología, Universidad de Valencia, Valencia, Spain.

Care staff in nursing homes work in a challenging environment, and the COVID-19
pandemic has exacerbated those challenges in an unprecedented way. On the other
hand, the sense of coherence (SOC) is a competence that could help these
professionals perceive the situation as understandable, manageable and
meaningful. This study aims to analyse the extent to which potential risk and
protective factors against burnout have affected nursing home workers during the 
COVID-19 pandemic and to assess the contribution of these factors to their
burnout. Three hundred forty professionals who worked in nursing homes in Spain
completed a survey and reported on their sociodemographic characteristics and
their organisational characteristics of the job related to COVID-19, SOC and
burnout. Multiple linear regression analyses were performed. The results showed
that the SOC is highly related to the dimensions of burnout and is a protective
factor against this. In addition, the increase in hours has a negative effect,
facilitating inadequate responses to stressful situations; and whereas perceived 
social support and availability of resources have a protective effect, the
deterioration in mental and physical health is the most important risk factor.
This study could help better understand the psychological consequences of the
effort that nursing home workers and can also help design mental health
prevention and care interventions for workers that provide them with resources
and supports that foster their coping skills.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/hsc.13397 
PMCID: PMC8250978
PMID: 33894094 


68. J Indian Soc Periodontol. 2021 Mar-Apr;25(2):150-155. doi:
10.4103/jisp.jisp_165_20. Epub 2021 Mar 1.

Association of sense of coherence with oral health behaviors and gingival
bleeding among adolescents.

Nagpal R(1), Gupta A(2), Marya CM(1), Mushtaq I(3), Tandon S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health Dentistry, Sudha Rustagi College of Dental
Sciences and Research, Faridabad, Haryana, India.
(2)Department of Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry, Faculty of Dental
Sciences, SGT University, Gurugram, Haryana, India.
(3)Chief Psychologist Child Development Clinic (Centre for Developmental and
Behavioral Pediatrics), New Delhi, India.
(4)Department of Public Health Dentistry, Faculty of Dental Sciences, SGT
University, Gurugram, Haryana, India.

Erratum in
    J Indian Soc Periodontol. 2021 May-Jun;25(3):270.

Context: Adolescents experience many types of gingival and periodontal diseases, 
including gingivitis, localized or generalized aggressive periodontitis, and
periodontal complications of various systemic diseases. The occurrence of
periodontal diseases is not only related to biotic factors but may also be
affected by nonbiotic factors such as oral health behaviors and practices.
Various factors that influence an individual's health-related behaviors include a
psychosocial construct named sense of coherence (SOC).
Aim: The aim of this study is to investigate the association of SOC with oral
health behaviors and gingival bleeding.
Settings and Design: This was a cross-sectional, analytical study that was done
in the school setting.
Materials and Methods: A random sample of 850 adolescents was selected from nine 
schools of the Faridabad block of Faridabad district (Haryana) through the
multistage cluster sampling technique. Methods of data collection included a
combination of questionnaire administration and clinical examination. The
questionnaire comprised sociodemographic variables, questions related to oral
health behaviors, and Antonovsky's SOC scale. The questionnaire was interviewer
administered.
Statistical Analysis: Unadjusted and adjusted rate ratios of gingival units
having bleeding on probing were estimated by Poisson regression multilevel
analysis in Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) software for
Microsoft Office.
Results: Adolescents whose mothers had studied <8 years (relative risk [RR] 1.26;
95% confidence interval [CI] 1.04-1.38), who were males (RR 1.198; 95% CI
1.01-1.29), low SOC (RR 15.93; 95% CI 13.06-19.35), and toothbrushing frequency
of less than once a day (RR 1.43; 95% CI 1.21-1.67) and children with plaque
index >1 (RR 2.765; 95% CI 2.12-3.25) presented with the higher number of
gingival units having bleeding.
Conclusion: SOC is associated with gingival bleeding through oral health
behaviors.

Copyright: © 2021 Indian Society of Periodontology.

DOI: 10.4103/jisp.jisp_165_20 
PMCID: PMC8041081
PMID: 33888948 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


69. J Pediatr Nurs. 2021 Apr 19. pii: S0882-5963(21)00110-X. doi:
10.1016/j.pedn.2021.04.007. [Epub ahead of print]

Validity and reliability of the sense of coherence scale among Korean adolescents
with chronic diseases.

Lim SH(1), Oh WO(2), Yeom IS(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Nursing, Korea University, 145 Anam-ro, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 02841,
South Korea.
(2)College of Nursing, Korea University, 145 Anam-ro, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 02841,
South Korea. Electronic address: wooh@korea.ac.kr.
(3)Department of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Severance Children's Hospital, Yonsei
University Health System, 50-1, Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 03722, South
Korea. Electronic address: RUTHIN76@yuhs.ac.

BACKGROUND: This study adapted the Sense of Coherence (SOC) Scale for Korean
adolescents with chronic diseases and evaluated its psychometric properties.
PURPOSE: This study aimed to validate the Sense of Coherence Scale for Korean
adolescents with Chronic Disease (SOC-AC).
DESIGN AND METHODS: This study employed the cross-sectional design. In total, 144
adolescents with chronic diseases (age: 15.07 ± 1.62 years; 58% male) responded
to the study questionnaire, which included the 13-item SOC scale (SOC-13) and the
10-item Children's Depression Inventory. The SOC-13 was shortened to create the
10-item SOC-AC. Through an exploratory factor analysis (EFA) and a confirmatory
factor analysis (CFA).
RESULTS: Following the EFA, two items (Item 8 and 13) with low factor loadings
were deleted. Further, following the CFA, one item (Item 2) with a high
modification index was deleted. The resulting 10-item SOC-AC exhibited a 3-factor
structure comprising the subscales of meaningfulness (Item 4, 7, and 12),
comprehensibility-manageability (Item 3, 5, 9, and 11), and resilience (Item 1,
6, and 10). The internal consistency of the SOC-AC was 0.868; the Cronbach's
alpha values were 0.765, 0.78, and 0.529 for the meaningfulness,
comprehensibility-manageability, and resilience subscales. The Pearson's
correlation coefficient for the association between the SOC-13 and depression
showed acceptable criterion-related validity (r = -0.436, p < .0001).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that the SOC-AC has satisfactory
psychometric properties and that it is useful for assessing SOC in adolescents
with chronic diseases.
PRACTICE IMPLICATION: This study revealed the utility of the examined scale to
measure SOC as a means of health promotion and care in adolescents with chronic
diseases.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pedn.2021.04.007 
PMID: 33888391 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None of the
named authors have any potential conflicts, real or perceived.


70. Rev Colomb Psiquiatr (Engl Ed). 2021 Mar 14. pii: S0034-7450(21)00047-0. doi:
10.1016/j.rcp.2021.02.007. [Epub ahead of print]

Mental Health Care of Health Workers During Covid-19: Recommendations Based on
Evidence and Expert Consensus.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Cantor-Cruz F(1), McDouall-Lombana J(2), Parra A(3), Martin-Benito L(4),
Paternina Quesada N(4), González-Giraldo C(5), Cárdenas Rodríguez ML(6), Castillo
Gutiérrez AM(6), Garzón-Lawton M(7), Ronderos-Bernal C(5), García Guarín B(8),
Acevedo-Peña JR(8), Gómez-Gómez OV(9), Yomayusa-González N(10).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Iberoamericano de Investigación en Salutogénesis y bienestar, Bogotá
D.C., Colombia; Instituto Global de Excelencia Clínica Keralty, Bogotá D.C.,
Colombia. Electronic address: ftcantor@keralty.com.
(2)Salud Mental, EPS Sanitas, Bogotá D.C., Colombia.
(3)Colegio Colombiano de Psicólogos, Bogotá D.C., Colombia.
(4)Departamento de Desarrollo Humano, Keralty, Bogotá D.C., Colombia.
(5)Fundación Keralty, Bogotá D.C., Colombia.
(6)Instituto Global de Excelencia Clínica Keralty, Bogotá D.C., Colombia; Centro 
para el cuidado centrado en las personas, Bogotá D.C., Colombia.
(7)Departamento de Salud Ocupacional, Keralty, Bogotá D.C., Colombia.
(8)Instituto Global de Excelencia Clínica Keralty, Bogotá D.C., Colombia; Agencia
de calidad y seguridad de las personas, Keralty, Bogotá D.C., Colombia.
(9)Instituto Global de Excelencia Clínica Keralty, Bogotá D.C., Colombia.
(10)Instituto Global de Excelencia Clínica Keralty, Bogotá D.C., Colombia; Grupo 
de investigación en Medicina Traslacional, Fundación Universitaria Sanitas,
Colombia.

INTRODUCTION: The crisis situation generated by COVID-19 and the measures adopted
have generated social changes in the normal dynamics of the general population
and especially for health workers, who find themselves caring for patients with
suspected or confirmed infection. Recent studies have detected in them depression
and anxiety symptoms and burnout syndrome, with personal and social conditions
impacting their response capacity during the health emergency. Our aim was to
generate recommendations for the promotion and protection of the mental health of
health workers and teams in the first line of care in the health emergency due to
COVID-19.
METHODS: A rapid literature search was carried out in PubMed and Google Scholar, 
and an iterative expert consensus and through electronic consultation, with 13
participants from the areas of psychology, psychiatry and medicine; the grading
of its strength and directionality was carried out according to the international
standards of the Joanna Briggs Institute.
RESULTS: Thirty-one recommendations were generated on self-care of health
workers, community care among health teams, screening for alarm signs in mental
health and for health institutions.
CONCLUSIONS: The promotion and protection activities in mental health to face the
health emergency generated by COVID-19 worldwide can include coordinated actions 
between workers, health teams and health institutions as part of a comprehensive,
community care, co-responsible and sustained over time.

Copyright © 2021 Asociación Colombiana de Psiquiatría. Publicado por Elsevier
España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rcp.2021.02.007 
PMCID: PMC7955936
PMID: 33875240 


71. Front Psychol. 2021 Mar 31;12:648770. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.648770. eCollection
2021.

A Space for Collaborative Creativity. How Collective Improvising Shapes 'a Sense 
of Belonging'.

Verneert F(1)(2), Nijs L(3)(4), De Baets T(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Associated Faculty of the Arts, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Department of Music, LUCA School of Arts, Campus Lemmens, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)IPEM, Department of Musicology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)CORPoREAL, Royal Conservatoire of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

In this contribution, we draw on findings from a non-formal, community music
project to elaborate on the relationship between the concept of eudaimonia, as
defined by Seligman, the interactive dimensions of collective free improvisation,
and the concept of collaborative creativity. The project revolves around The
Ostend Street Orkestra (TOSO), a music ensemble within which homeless adults and 
individuals with a psychiatric or alcohol/drug related background engage in
collective musical improvisation. Between 2017 and 2019 data was collected
through open interviews and video recordings of rehearsals and performances.
Participant data was analyzed through inductive analysis based on the principles 
of grounded theory. One interesting finding was the discrepancy in the
participant interviews between social relationships indicative of a negative
affect about social group interaction versus strong feelings of group coherence
and belonging. Video recordings of performances and rehearsals showed clear
enjoyment and pleasure while playing music. Alongside verbal reflection through
one-on-one interviews video recordings and analysis of moment-to moment
observations should be used, in order to capture the complexity of community
music projects with homeless people. The initial open coding was aligned with the
five elements of the PERMA model. Overall, we observed more focus on Relationship
(sense of belonging), Engagement (flow in rehearsals and performances) and
Meaning (belonging to something greater than yourself) and less on Positive
Emotion and Accomplishment (goal setting).

Copyright © 2021 Verneert, Nijs and De Baets.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.648770 
PMCID: PMC8044394
PMID: 33868125 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


72. Front Psychol. 2021 Mar 18;12:625429. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.625429. eCollection
2021.

Perceived Autobiographical Coherence Predicts Depressive Symptoms Over Time
Through Positive Self-Concept.

Hallford DJ(1), Ricarte JJ(2), Hermans D(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC, Australia.
(2)Applied Cognitive Psychology Unit Institute of Neurological Disabilities
(IDINE), Department of Psychology, School of Education, University of Castilla-La
Mancha, Albacete, Spain.
(3)Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, katholieke Universiteit (KU)
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

The coherence of autobiographical memories plays an important role in
psychological well-being, as borne out by recent studies. This study aimed to
advance this understanding by assessing whether coherence predicted depressive
symptoms over time in adults. Further, it aimed to specify mediators through
which this association might occur, namely psychological resources of self-esteem
self-efficacy, meaning in life, and optimism. A sample of 160 participants (M age
= 26.4, SD = 3.2, 58.1% women) completed surveys at three time-points spaced 1
week apart. The surveys contained measures of the perceived coherence of life
stories and autobiographical memories, psychological resources, and depressive
symptoms. The results of a path analysis model, controlling for depressive
symptoms at baseline, indicated that perceived causal coherence was the only
unique predictor of later depressive symptoms, and that this occurred through
positive self-concept, represented by self-esteem and self-efficacy. Limitations 
of the study include no examination of cultural background as a moderating factor
and the short time-intervals. Overall, the findings provide further evidence that
the perception of how events have unfolded and impacted on one's life and sense
of self is particularly important in mitigating depressive symptoms. It extends
on our understanding by showing this occurs through changes in self-concept.

Copyright © 2021 Hallford, Ricarte and Hermans.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.625429 
PMCID: PMC8044926
PMID: 33868092 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


73. Work. 2021;68(4):1211-1220. doi: 10.3233/WOR-213450.

Sense of Coherence and Lean-based leadership and alterations in sick leave and
productivity at a steel wire manufacturing unit.

Halling B(1)(2), Bergman M(3), Wijk K(4)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial Design, Industrial Management and Mechanical
Engineering, University of Gavle, Gävle, Sweden.
(2)Division of Ergonomics, Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden.
(3)Outokumpu, Avesta, Sweden.
(4)Centre for Research and Development, Region Gävleborg, Gävle, Sweden.
(5)Department of Occupational Health Sciences and Psychology, Faculty of Health
and Occupational Studies, University of Gävle, Gävle, Sweden.
(6)Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Managers have an important role in the creation of workplace
conditions that prevent sick leave and lead to high performance. In Lean, the
assumption is that people are the source for continuous improvements. There is a 
need for more knowledge about what kind of leadership can help managers in a Lean
context to create workplace conditions for less sick leave and higher
performance.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to examine how productivity and rate of 
sick leave changed at a stainless wire manufacturing unit after implementing a
new leadership approach based on Sense of Coherence theory (SOC) and Lean
philosophy.
METHODS: In this case study, interventions coupled with productivity, quality and
sick leave evaluations through the company's key performance indicators were
performed. The follow-up was also based on narrative descriptions from the
management team in the course of four meetings during the intervention. Notes
were taken and analyzed regarding perceived outcomes of the intervention.
RESULTS: The results showed that leadership based on SOC and Lean philosophy is
positively correlated with productivity per worker, as was the amount of yearly
production that met the quality specifications. The amount of sick leave
decreased during the period of the intervention compared to before the
intervention.
CONCLUSIONS: Changes in management contribute to productivity. Combining Lean
tools and Lean philosophy with the Sense of Coherence theory (SOC) as a base for 
leadership can influence productivity and decrease the rate of sick leave.

DOI: 10.3233/WOR-213450 
PMID: 33867380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. BMC Public Health. 2021 Apr 17;21(1):741. doi: 10.1186/s12889-021-10788-8.

Impact of the COVID-19 crisis on work and private life, mental well-being and
self-rated health in German and Swiss employees: a cross-sectional online survey.

Tušl M(1), Brauchli R(2), Kerksieck P(2), Bauer GF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Public & Organizational Health, Center of Salutogenesis, Epidemiology,
Biostatistics and Prevention Institute, University of Zurich, Hirschengraben 84, 
8001, Zurich, Switzerland. martin.tusl@uzh.ch.
(2)Public & Organizational Health, Center of Salutogenesis, Epidemiology,
Biostatistics and Prevention Institute, University of Zurich, Hirschengraben 84, 
8001, Zurich, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 crisis has radically changed the way people live and
work. While most studies have focused on prevailing negative consequences,
potential positive shifts in everyday life have received less attention. Thus, we
examined the actual and perceived overall impact of the COVID-19 crisis on work
and private life, and the consequences for mental well-being (MWB), and
self-rated health (SRH) in German and Swiss employees.
METHODS: Cross-sectional data were collected via an online questionnaire from
2118 German and Swiss employees recruited through an online panel service
(18-65 years, working at least 20 h/week, various occupations). The sample
provides a good representation of the working population in both countries. Using
logistic regression, we analyzed how sociodemographic factors and self-reported
changes in work and private life routines were associated with participants'
perceived overall impact of the COVID-19 crisis on work and private life.
Moreover, we explored how the perceived impact and self-reported changes were
associated with MWB and SRH.
RESULTS: About 30% of employees reported that their work and private life had
worsened, whereas about 10% reported improvements in work and 13% in private
life. Mandatory short-time work was strongly associated with perceived negative
impact on work life, while work from home, particularly if experienced for the
first time, was strongly associated with a perceived positive impact on work
life. Concerning private life, younger age, living alone, reduction in leisure
time, and changes in quantity of caring duties were strongly associated with
perceived negative impact. In contrast, living with a partner or family,
short-time work, and increases in leisure time and caring duties were associated 
with perceived positive impact on private life. Perceived negative impact of the 
crisis on work and private life and mandatory short-time work were associated
with lower MWB and SRH. Moreover, perceived positive impact on private life and
an increase in leisure time were associated with higher MWB.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study show the differential impact of the
COVID-19 crisis on people's work and private life as well as the consequences for
MWB and SRH. This may inform target groups and situation-specific interventions
to ameliorate the crisis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-021-10788-8 
PMCID: PMC8052554
PMID: 33865354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Eur J Ophthalmol. 2021 Apr 16:11206721211010616. doi: 10.1177/11206721211010616. 
[Epub ahead of print]

Multimodal imaging of optic disc melanocytoma.

Mazzini C(1)(2), Vicini G(1)(2), Nicolosi C(1)(2), Pieretti G(1)(2), Rizzo
S(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Ocular Oncology, Neuromuscular and Sense Organs Department, Careggi
University Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(2)Eye Clinic, Neuromuscular and Sense Organs Department, Careggi University
Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(3)Ophthalmology Unit, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Fondazione
Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, Rome, Italy.
(4)Consiglio Nazionale della Ricerca (CNR), Pisa, Italy.

PURPOSE: To describe the findings of four patients (four eyes) with optic disc
melanocytoma (ODM), using multimodal imaging.
METHODS: Retrospective case series.
RESULTS: On ocular ultrasonography ODMs appeared as hyperechogenic lesions with
moderate-to-high internal reflectivity. On blue-light fundus autofluorescence,
ODMs showed total hypoautofluorescence, while, on infrared reflectance images
appeared as bright and well-marginated lesions. MultiColor composite images
showed reddish-brown lesions with well-defined margins. Swept-source optical
coherence tomography revealed elevated lesions covering the optic disc with an
irregular hyperreflective surface, dishomogeneous internal structure with
hyperreflective dots, and posterior shadowing. In all cases optical coherence
tomography angiography detected intratumoral blood vessels which were not
detectable with fluorescein angiography.
CONCLUSION: Multimodal imaging in ODM might be useful both at presentation,
increasing the diagnostic accuracy, and at follow-up, providing helpful details, 
that can help to rule out the possibility of malignant transformation and other
ocular complications.

DOI: 10.1177/11206721211010616 
PMID: 33863247 


76. Soc Work. 2021 May 13;66(2):148-156. doi: 10.1093/sw/swab001.

Social Work with Environmental Migrants: Exploring the Scope for Spiritually
Sensitive Practice.

Pandya S.

This article reports a survey of social workers' (N = 1,204) views on the scope
for spiritually sensitive practice with environmental migrants. Results indicated
some variations in models, assessment methods, techniques, and intervention
goals. Social workers from North America and South America, females, Christians, 
and Hindus working with environmentally forced migrants, and with higher scores
on personal spirituality measures, favored the strengths perspective and model of
salutogenesis, spiritual life maps, and spiritual competencies open dialogue as
assessment methods; meditation and mindfulness as congruous techniques; and
intervention goals as comprehensibility-manageability-meaningfulness and positive
coping. Social workers from the Asia-Pacific and African regions, males, Muslims,
and Buddhists working with environmental emergency and environmentally induced
economic migrants, and with lower personal spirituality scores, preferred the
biopsychosocial model and transpersonal spectrum models, spiritual genograms and 
spiritual history assessment; techniques such as guided visualization, journal
keeping, physical disciplines, and active imagination; and goals of interventions
such as happiness and forgiveness.

© 2021 National Association of Social Workers.

DOI: 10.1093/sw/swab001 
PMID: 33860328 


77. Clin Gerontol. 2021 Apr 15:1-17. doi: 10.1080/07317115.2021.1912239. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Supported Web-Based Acceptance and Commitment Therapy for Older Family Caregivers
(CareACT) Compared to Usual Care.

Lappalainen P(1)(2), Pakkala I(1), Lappalainen R(2), Nikander R(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Gerocenter Foundation for Research and Development, Jyväskylä, Finland.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland.
(3)Department of Research & Education, Central Hospital of Central Finland,
Jyväskylä, Finland.
(4)Faculty of Sport Sciences, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland.

Objectives: The objective of the present study was to investigate whether an
acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT)-based web-intervention (Group 1,
CareACT), or a standardized rehabilitation in a rehabilitation center (Group 2)
was effective in enhancing the psychological well-being of family caregivers aged
60 and over compared to support provided by voluntary caregiver associations
(Group 3).Methods: Altogether, 149 family caregivers participated in this
quasi-experimental study. Primary outcome measure was depression. Secondary
outcomes included anxiety, sense of coherence, quality of life, psychological
flexibility, experiential avoidance, and thought suppression. The questionnaires 
were administered at baseline, and four, and 10 months post-measurement. We
investigated differences in the changes between the groups using Mplus modeling
techniques.Results: Regarding the main outcome of depression, the results suggest
that the CareACT intervention was superior to standardized rehabilitation and to 
the support given by caregiver associations at four months, both showing a
medium-sized difference between the groups. However, the change from four to
10 months post-intervention was not significantly different between these groups 
(d = 0.32-0.36). Thought suppression showed a significantly different change
between the three groups from baseline to four months and to 10 months
post-measurement (p = .038).Conclusions: Web-based ACT may have beneficial
effects on depressive symptoms and thought suppression in older
caregivers.Clinical implications: Web-based ACT could be a feasible alternative
to institutional rehabilitation and support provided by voluntary caregiver
associations. Web-based ACT responds flexibly to the needs of caregivers and
provides them an opportunity for learning new skills to promote well-being.

DOI: 10.1080/07317115.2021.1912239 
PMID: 33856279 


78. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2021 Apr 13. doi: 10.1007/s00404-021-06056-0. [Epub ahead of
print]

Factors of sexual quality of life in gynaecological cancers: a systematic
literature review.

Roussin M(1), Lowe J(2), Hamilton A(2), Martin L(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health and Behavioural Sciences, University of the Sunshine Coast,
90 Sippy Downs Drive, Sunshine Coast, QLD, 4556, Australia.
melanie.roussin@research.usc.edu.au.
(2)School of Health and Behavioural Sciences, University of the Sunshine Coast,
90 Sippy Downs Drive, Sunshine Coast, QLD, 4556, Australia.

Erratum in
    Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2021 May 27;:.

BACKGROUND: The impact of cancer diagnosis and treatment on sexual quality of
life (SQoL) is a well-established survivorship issue for gynaecological cancer
survivors (GCS), yet little is known on how to intervene.
PURPOSE: The aim of this systematic review was to identify the factors explaining
the variability in SQoL for GCS.
METHODS: We used the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) framework and the software Covidence. Electronic databases
Scopus, Web of Science, PUBMED and CINAHL were searched for original research on 
GCS published between 2002 and 2018. We performed a two-stage screening process
against selection criteria and quality assessment of individual studies. The
Salutogenic Theory and the PRECEDE-PROCEED model were used as theoretical
frameworks to identify and categorise factors.
RESULTS: The initial search yielded 3,505 articles resulting in a total of 46
studies used to examine the association between factors of SQoL and
gynaecological cancers. Our findings suggested that SQoL varies across subgroups 
based on age, menopausal status, relationship status, and treatment modality.
Protective factors included clinicians' knowledge and confidence, preventive
medical approach, risk and needs assessment, patient-clinician communication,
relationship quality, psychosocial support, symptom management, accessibility of 
psychosexual care, and self-efficacy in the rediscovery of sexuality.
CONCLUSION: Despite the high incidence and long-term impact of sexual health
issues on quality of life, supportive care needs are not being met. A better
understanding of the evidence base around the factors of SQoL can help health
professionals take steps to protect and improve SQoL in GCS.

DOI: 10.1007/s00404-021-06056-0 
PMID: 33847794 


79. J Nurs Manag. 2021 Apr 12. doi: 10.1111/jonm.13331. [Epub ahead of print]

Health care workers' protection and psychological safety during the COVID-19
pandemic in Spain.

Domínguez-Salas S(1), Gómez-Salgado J(2)(3), Guillén-Gestoso C(4), Romero-Martín 
M(5), Ortega-Moreno M(6), Ruiz-Frutos C(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Universidad Loyola Andalucía, Dos Hermanas, Sevilla,
Spain.
(2)Department of Sociology, Social Work and Public Health, Faculty of Labour
Sciences, University of Huelva, Huelva, Spain.
(3)Safety and Health Postgraduate Programme, Universidad Espíritu Santo,
Guayaquil, Ecuador.
(4)Universidade Atlantica Lisboa, Barcarena, Portugal.
(5)Department of Nursing, Faculty of Nursing, University of Huelva, Huelva,
Spain.
(6)Department of Economy. Faculty of Labour Sciences, University of Huelva,
Huelva, Spain.

AIMS: To analyse the relationship between work engagement, sense of coherence and
psychological distress levels in Spanish health professionals who were active
during the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown.
BACKGROUND: Work engagement and sense of coherence can help professionals to cope
with work-related psychological distress due to the harsh conditions of the
COVID-19 working environment.
METHODS: Cross-sectional observational study of 1,459 health care professionals. 
The Utrecht Work Engagement Scale, the Sense of Coherence Scale and Goldberg's
General Health Questionnaire were distributed and analysed with descriptive and
multiple linear regression methods.
RESULTS: High levels of work engagement, especially in the dedication dimension, 
of sense of coherence, in particular in the meaningfulness dimension, and
psychological distress were obtained. Significant correlations (p < .001) were
identified between all the variables.
CONCLUSIONS: Work engagement and sense of coherence correlated positively with
each other and both negatively with psychological distress. So, health care
professionals, despite presenting psychological distress, perceive their work
satisfactorily and positively despite the severity of the situation and the harsh
conditions.
IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING MANAGEMENT: Sense of coherence and work engagement are
protective factors against psychological distress. Preventive measures for
professionals should go through the dimensionalization of the problem and the
adaptation of practical measures for daily management.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jonm.13331 
PMCID: PMC8250215
PMID: 33844359 


80. Ophthalmic Genet. 2021 Apr 12:1-8. doi: 10.1080/13816810.2021.1910963. [Epub
ahead of print]

Current concepts on diffuse choroidal hemangioma in Sturge Weber syndrome.

Formisano M(1), di Pippo MC(2), Scuderi L(1), Abdolrahimzadeh S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology Unit, Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome,
Policlinico Umberto I, Rome, Italy.
(2)Ophthalmology Unit, Neurosciences, Mental Health, and Sense Organs (NESMOS)
Department, Sapienza University of Rome, Faculty of Medicine and Psychology, St. 
Andrea Hospital, Rome, Italy.

Background: Diffuse choroidal hemangioma (DCH) is a benign vascular tumor that is
characteristically found in the Sturge-Weber syndrome (SWS). Recent genetic
discoveries demonstrate that DCH occurs sporadically from an activating mutation 
in GNAQ at codon R183. Mutations in GNAQ or GNA11 result in dysregulation of the 
mitogen-activated protein kinase, which influences gene transcription and results
in cellular proliferation. DCH may not always be readily detected on routine
ophthalmological examination, consequently diagnosis and multidisciplinary
referral are often delayed.Purpose: A literature search was performed through
April 2020 without a lower date limit. This review will summarize the
pathogenesis, diagnosis and management of DCH.Discussion: Multimodal imaging
facilitates early detection of the condition. In particular, enhanced depth
imaging spectral domain optical coherence tomography enables non-invasive,
high-resolution visualization of the choroid to even detect mild choroidal
thickening. Management of symptomatic DCH is generally difficult and results in
poor visual outcome, thus, treatment is generally unwarranted, unless the
hemangioma complicated by serous retinal detachment. The main treatment method is
radiation therapy with external beam radiation therapy, proton beam therapy,
plaque brachytherapy, and gamma knife surgery where low doses of radiation entail
fewer complications. One method of alternative management is with photodynamic
therapy that, although less invasive with a lower rate of complications, is not
always feasible or effective in cases with extensive exudative retinal
detachment.Conclusions: Multimodal ophthalmological imaging facilitates diagnosis
of DCH and lifelong surveillance is essential in patients.

DOI: 10.1080/13816810.2021.1910963 
PMID: 33843430 


81. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2021 Apr 9. pii: zvab030. doi: 10.1093/eurjcn/zvab030.
[Epub ahead of print]

Effectiveness of tailored intervention with a salutogenic approach to improve
adherence in adults with hypertension: a non-randomized trial.

Esquivel Garzón N(1), Díaz Heredia LP(2), Grisales Romero H(3), Cañon-Montañez
W(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Cl. 42 # 1B-1, Universidad del Tolima,
Ibagué, 730001, Colombia.
(2)Faculty of Nursing, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Cra.30 #45-03 Ciudad
Universitaria. Edificio 228, Piso 3, Of. 306, Bogotá, 111321, Colombia.
(3)Demography and Health Research Group, National School of Public Health,
Universidad de Antioquia, Cl. 62 #52-59, Medellín, 050010, Colombia.
(4)Faculty of Nursing, Universidad de Antioquia, Cl. 64 #53-09, Medellín, 050010,
Colombia.

AIMS: Hypertension (HTN) is a chronic long-term, slowly progressing disease. For 
HTN control, management, and prevention of associated complications, adequate
adherence to treatment is required. It has been proposed that tailored
interventions to individual needs are required to address the phenomenon of
adherence to treatment. However, studies evaluating the effects of tailored
interventions to improve adherence are still scarce. The aim of this study is to 
evaluate the effectiveness of a tailored intervention using a salutogenic
approach, to improve adherence in patients with HTN.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A non-randomized trial design was used in this study. Adult 
patients with HTN were allocated in two groups: tailored intervention (n = 75)
and standard care (n = 78). The content of the tailored intervention was based on
personal resources and elaboration of an action plan with objectives in agreement
with the patients. Patient outcomes (treatment adherence, blood pressure) were
assessed both at the beginning of the study and at the 4-week follow-up for the
intervention group and the standard care group. The Treatment Adherence
Questionnaire for Patients with Hypertension was used to measure adherence. The
results of this study showed that the total score and each dimension of the
adherence questionnaire (medications, diet, physical activity, weight control,
stimulation, and stress relief) increased significantly in the experimental group
compared with the control group (P < 0.05). For the group assigned to tailored
intervention, the delta score of the total adherence score increased in the final
evaluation to 9.4 (95% CI = 8.60-10.28).
CONCLUSION: A tailored intervention with a salutogenic approach appears to be
effective for improving adherence in patients with HTN. Randomized controlled
trials are required to confirm the effect of tailored interventions in this type 
of population.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author(s) 2021. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/eurjcn/zvab030 
PMID: 33837400 


82. Int J Behav Med. 2021 Apr 8. doi: 10.1007/s12529-021-09970-4. [Epub ahead of
print]

The Role of Risk Perceptions and Affective Consequences in COVID-19 Protective
Behaviors.

Alegria KE(1), Fleszar-Pavlović SE(1), Ngo DD(1), Beam A(1), Halliday DM(1),
Hinojosa BM(1), Hua J(1), Johnson AE(1), McAnally K(1), McKinley LE(1), Temourian
AA(1), Song AV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of California, 5200 North
Lake Road, Merced, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of California, 5200 North
Lake Road, Merced, CA, USA. asong5@ucmerced.edu.

BACKGROUND: Slowing the spread of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) requires
behavioral changes such as physical distancing (e.g., staying a 6-foot distance
from others, avoiding mass gatherings, reducing houseguests), wearing masks,
reducing trips to nonessential business establishments, and increasing hand
washing. Like other health behaviors, COVID-19 related behaviors may be related
to risk representations. Risk representations are the cognitive responses a
person holds about illness risk such as, identity (i.e., label/characteristics of
risk), cause (i.e., factors causing condition), timeline (i.e., onset/duration of
risk), consequences (i.e., intrapersonal/interpersonal outcomes), behavioral
efficacy (i.e., if and how the condition can be controlled/treated), and illness 
risk coherence (i.e., extent to which representations, behaviors, and beliefs are
congruent). The current study applies the Common-Sense Model of Self-Regulation
(CSM-SR) to evaluate how risk representations may relate to COVID-19 protective
and risk behaviors.
METHODS: Participants include 400 workers from Amazon's Mechanical Turk aged
≥ 18 years and US residents. Participants completed an online survey measuring
risk representations (B-IPQ) and COVID-19 related behaviors, specifically,
physical distancing, hand washing, and shopping frequency.
RESULTS: Risk coherence, consequences, timeline, emotional representation, and
behavioral efficacy were related to risk and protective behaviors.
CONCLUSIONS: Risk representations vary in their relationship to COVID-19 risk and
protective behaviors. Implications include the importance of coherent, targeted, 
consistent health communication, and effective health policy in mitigating the
spread of COVID-19.

DOI: 10.1007/s12529-021-09970-4 
PMCID: PMC8032317
PMID: 33834368 


83. Exp Brain Res. 2021 Apr 7. doi: 10.1007/s00221-021-06087-8. [Epub ahead of print]

Studying the sense of agency in the absence of motor movement: an investigation
into temporal binding of tactile sensations and auditory effects.

Antusch S(1), Custers R(2), Marien H(2), Aarts H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Utrecht University, PO BOX 80140, 3508 TC, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands. s.antusch@uu.nl.
(2)Department of Psychology, Utrecht University, PO BOX 80140, 3508 TC, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Psychology, Utrecht University, PO BOX 80140, 3508 TC, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands. h.aarts@uu.nl.

People form coherent representations of goal-directed actions. Such agency
experiences of intentional action are reflected by a shift in temporal
perception: self-generated motor movements and subsequent sensory effects are
perceived to occur closer together in time-a phenomenon termed intentional
binding. Building on recent research suggesting that temporal binding occurs
without intentionally performing actions, we further examined whether such
perceptual compression occurs when motor action is fully absent. In three
experiments, we used a novel sensory-based adaptation of the Libet clock paradigm
to assess how a brief tactile sensation on the index finger and a resulting
auditory stimulus perceptually bind together in time. Findings revealed robust
temporal repulsion (instead of binding) between tactile sensation and auditory
effect. Temporal repulsion was attenuated when participants could anticipate the 
identity and temporal onset (two crucial components of intentional action) of the
tactile sensation. These findings are briefly discussed in the context of
differences between intentional movement and anticipated bodily sensations in
shaping action coherence and agentic experiences.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-021-06087-8 
PMID: 33829297 


84. BMC Health Serv Res. 2021 Apr 7;21(1):312. doi: 10.1186/s12913-021-06311-9.

Professional courage to create a pathway within midwives' fields of work: a
grounded theory study.

Hansson M(1), Lundgren I(2), Hensing G(3), Dencker A(2), Eriksson M(4), Carlsson 
IM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health and Care Sciences, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of 
Gothenburg, P O Box 457, 405 30, Gothenburg, SE, Sweden. malin.hansson@fhs.gu.se.
(2)Institute of Health and Care Sciences, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of 
Gothenburg, P O Box 457, 405 30, Gothenburg, SE, Sweden.
(3)Department of Public Health and Community Medicine, Institute of Medicine,
Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg University, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Department of Health Sciences, University West, Trollhättan, Sweden.
(5)Department of Health and Nursing, School of Health and Welfare, Halmstad
University, Halmstad, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The theory of salutogenesis focuses on resources for health and
health-promoting processes. In the context of midwives' work, this is not well
described despite the importance for occupational health and the intention to
remain in the profession. In order to promote a healthy workplace, it is
necessary to consider the facilitating conditions that contribute to a
sustainable working life. Therefore, the aim of this study was to explore
health-promoting facilitative conditions in the work situation on labour wards
according to midwives.
METHODS: A constant comparative analysis was applied to face-to-face interviews
with midwives that constituted the empirical material in this classical grounded 
theory study.
RESULTS: The substantive theory of Professional courage to create a pathway
within midwives' fields of work emerged as an explanation of the health-promoting
facilitative conditions in midwives' work situation. The theory consists of a
four-stage process with prerequisite contextual conditions: visualising
midwifery, organisational resources and a reflective and learning environment,
that were needed to fulfil the midwives' main concern a Feasibility of working as
a midwife. This meant being able to work according to best-known midwifery theory
and practice in each situation. Positive consequences of a fulfilled main concern
were a professional identity and grounded knowledge that enabled the development 
of the resistant resource professional courage. The courage made it feasible for 
midwives to move freely on their pathway within the different fields of work
extending between normal and medicalised birth and being autonomous and
regulated.
CONCLUSIONS: A professional courage was required to create a pathway within
midwives' fields of work, to move freely depending on what actions were needed in
a particular work situation. Professional courage could be seen as a resistance
resource, enabling midwives to become resilient when dealing with the
unpredictable work situation. However, there are vital organisational
preconditions that needed to be fulfilled for workplaces to become facilitative, 
organisational resources, visualising midwifery and a reflective environment. The
theory can be used to foster health-promoting and sustainable work situations for
midwives, which is possible if the organisational preconditions are met. This
could be a key factor in retaining midwives in the profession.

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-021-06311-9 
PMCID: PMC8028835
PMID: 33827550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Sex Res Social Policy. 2021 Mar 31:1-11. doi: 10.1007/s13178-021-00573-y. [Epub
ahead of print]

Not in the Brochure: Porneia and Residential Aged Care.

Henrickson M(1), Cook CM(2), MacDonald S(3), Atefi N(4), Schouten V(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Work, Massey University, Private Bag 102904, North Shore MSC,
Auckland, 0745 New Zealand.
(2)School of Clinical Sciences, Nursing Department, AUT University, Auckland, New
Zealand.
(3)School of Nursing, Manukau Institute of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand.
(4)School of Social Work, Massey University, Auckland, New Zealand.
(5)School of Humanities, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand.

Introduction: Sexuality and intimacy in residential aged care (RAC) are receiving
increased research attention. In this article, porneia refers to access to sex
workers, as well as online pornography, and masturbation by residents in RAC. Sex
work is legal and regulated in Aotearoa New Zealand.
Methods: The present study was a two-arm mixed-method cross-sectional study using
a concurrent triangulation design. A validated survey tool was developed. Data
were collected in 2018-2019: 433 staff surveys were collected from 35 RAC across 
the country; 61 interviews were carried out with 77 staff, residents, and family 
members.
Results: Staff opinions about sex work and pornography were inconclusive.
Nevertheless, access to sex workers occurs in many RAC facilities across the
country. Interviews demonstrated a diversity of responses among the three groups;
staff attitudes are paramount.
Conclusions: Some staff are prepared for resident requests for sex workers;
others continue to look to policies and management for guidance, but such
policies are often lacking. Most staff have adopted the language of needs vs.
rights which dominates the literature.
Policy Implications: Staff education on sexuality and facility policy is
essential; education for residents and their families is also desirable.
Facilities often over-notify third parties. Discourse about sexuality needs to
move towards a person-centred, salutogenic approach.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC,
part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s13178-021-00573-y 
PMCID: PMC8010488
PMID: 33815627 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of InterestThe authors declare no
competing interests.


86. Healthcare (Basel). 2021 Mar 26;9(4). pii: 371. doi: 10.3390/healthcare9040371.

The Digital Divide in the Era of COVID-19: An Investigation into an Important
Obstacle to the Access to the mHealth by the Citizen.

Giansanti D(1), Veltro G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre Tisp, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 00161 Rome, Italy.
(2)Engineering Faculty, Tor Vergata University, 00133 Rome, Italy.

In general, during the COVID-19 pandemic there has been a growth in the use of
digital technological solutions in many sectors, from that of consumption, to
Digital Health and in particular to mobile health (mHealth) where an important
role has been played by mobile technology (mTech). However, this has not always
happened in a uniform way. In fact, in many cases, citizens found themselves
unable to take advantage of these opportunities due to the phenomenon of the
Digital Divide (DD). It depends on multifaceted aspects ranging from the lack of 
access to instrumental and network resources, to cultural and social barriers and
also to possible forms of communication disability. In the study we set ourselves
the articulated goal of developing a probing methodology that addresses the
problems connected to DD in a broad sense, capable of minimizing the bias of a
purely electronic submission and evaluating its effectiveness and outcome. At the
moment, we have submitted the survey both electronically (with an embedded
solution to spread it inside the families/acquaintances) and using the wire
phone. The results highlighted three polarities (a) the coherence of the two
methods; (b) the outcome of the entire submission in relation to key issues
(e.g., familiarity on contact tracing Apps, medical Apps, social Apps, messaging 
Apps, Digital-health, non-medical Apps); (c) a Digital Divide strongly dependent 
on age and in particular for the elderly is mainly evident in the use of mTech in
general and in particular in mHealth applications. Future developments of the
study foresee, after adequate data-mining, an in-depth study of all the aspects
proposed in the survey, from those relating to access to resources, training,
disability and other cultural factors.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare9040371 
PMCID: PMC8065806
PMID: 33810572 


87. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Mar 30;18(7). pii: 3602. doi:
10.3390/ijerph18073602.

Validity and Reliability of the Caregiver Strain Index Scale in Women during the 
Puerperium in Spain.

Feligreras-Alcalá D(1), Cazalilla-López MDP(1), Del-Pino-Casado R(1), Frías-Osuna
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Jaén, 23071
Jaén, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The objective of this study is to determine the validity and
reliability of the Caregiver Strain Index (CSI) for women during the postpartum
period. Methods: This is a validation study of a measurement instrument. This
study includes 212 women over the age of 19 who gave birth from March to
September 2019 in Maternal and Child Hospital of Jaén (Spain). The items of the
CSI were adapted for newborn care. Content validity was measured by five experts,
calculating the index of agreement (Aiken's V). Criterion validity was assessed
by correlations with scores of other tools that measure constructs related to
burden (Edinburgh Postpartum Depression Scale, State-Trait Anxiety Questionnaire,
SOC-13 and Duke-UNC-11). Construct validity was determined by the known-groups
method. Internal consistency was measured using Cronbach's Alpha, and stability
was analysed using the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC).
RESULTS: Regarding content validity, an Aiken's V of 1.00 (p = 0.032) was
obtained. Regarding criterion validity, the correlation analyses showed
statistically significant coefficients between the scores of the questionnaire
and those of the sense of coherence (r = -0.447, p < 0.001), depressive symptoms 
(r = 0.429, p < 0.001), social support (rho = -0.379, p < 0.001) and anxiety
symptoms (r = 0.532, p < 0.001). The known-groups method showed statistically
significant differences in the mean of subjective burden between the groups
(depressive symptoms, anxiety symptoms, sense of coherence and social support).
The total scale obtained a Cronbach's alpha value of 0.710. The ICC was 0.979.
CONCLUSIONS: The adapted CSI is a valid and reliable screening tool for the
subjective burden in women during the puerperium. The adapted CSI can play an
important role as a guide to detect the subjective burden in women during the
puerperium.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18073602 
PMCID: PMC8036977
PMID: 33808482  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Mar 23;18(6). pii: 3308. doi:
10.3390/ijerph18063308.

Life Satisfaction and Adaptation in Persons with Parkinson's Disease-A
Qualitative Study.

Rosengren L(1)(2), Forsberg A(1)(3), Brogårdh C(1)(2), Lexell J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, Lund University, S-221 00 Lund, Sweden.
(2)Department of Neurology, Rehabilitation Medicine, Memory Disorders and
Geriatrics, Skåne University Hospital, S-221 85 Lund, Sweden.
(3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Skåne University Hospital, S-222 85 Lund,
Sweden.

Persons with Parkinson's disease (PD) need to adapt to their progressive
disability to achieve and maintain a high degree of life satisfaction (LS), but
little is known about the meaning of LS and adaptation. This study aimed to gain 
an in-depth understanding of the meaning of LS and adaptation in persons with PD.
Open-ended in-depth interviews were performed with 13 persons diagnosed with PD, 
9 women, 3 men, and one non-binary person (mean age 54 years, mean time since
diagnosis 3.4 years). The interviews were analyzed using a
phenomenological-hermeneutic approach. The participants were in the process of
adapting to their new health situation. There were two quite distinct groups: one
that adapted through acceptance and one that struggled to resist the disease and 
the profound impact it had on their lives. The thematic structural analysis
covers eight themes illustrating the meaning of LS and adaptation, through either
acceptance or resistance. Adaptation to PD involves a transitional process
characterized by either acceptance or resistance, which influences a person's LS.
Acceptance makes LS possible, whereas resistance constitutes a behavioral barrier
to adaptation and LS. Rehabilitation professionals need to understand this
individual process to be able to support a person with PD to reach and maintain a
high level of LS. Understanding the link between LS and adaptation can support
rehabilitation professionals to provide targeted interventions for people with
PD.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18063308 
PMCID: PMC8004639
PMID: 33806884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Mar 3;18(5). pii: 2486. doi:
10.3390/ijerph18052486.

Mechanisms of Impact of Blue Spaces on Human Health: A Systematic Literature
Review and Meta-Analysis.

Georgiou M(1), Morison G(2), Smith N(1), Tieges Z(1)(3), Chastin S(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health and Life Sciences, Glasgow Caledonian University, 70
Cowcaddens Road, Glasgow G4 0BA, UK.
(2)School of Engineering and Built Environment, Glasgow Caledonian University, 70
Cowcaddens Road, Glasgow G4 0BA, UK.
(3)Geriatric Medicine, Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, 51 Little France
Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4SA, UK.
(4)Department of Movement and Sports, Ghent University, Watersportlaan 2, 9000
Ghent, Belgium.

Blue spaces have been found to have significant salutogenic effects. However,
little is known about the mechanisms and pathways that link blue spaces and
health. The purpose of this systematic review and meta-analysis is to summarise
the evidence and quantify the effect of blue spaces on four hypothesised
mediating pathways: physical activity, restoration, social interaction and
environmental factors. Following the PRISMA guidelines, a literature search was
conducted using six databases (PubMed, Scopus, PsycInfo, Web of Science, Cochrane
Library, EBSCOHOST/CINAHL). Fifty studies were included in our systematic review.
The overall quality of the included articles, evaluated with the Qualsyst tool,
was judged to be very good, as no mediating pathway had an average article
quality lower than 70%. Random-effects meta-analyses were conducted for physical 
activity, restoration and social interaction. Living closer to blue space was
associated with statistically significantly higher physical activity levels
(Cohen's d = 0.122, 95% CI: 0.065, 0.179). Shorter distance to blue space was not
associated with restoration (Cohen's d = 0.123, 95% CI: -0.037, 0.284) or social 
interaction (Cohen's d = -0.214, 95% CI: -0.55, 0.122). Larger amounts of blue
space within a geographical area were significantly associated with higher
physical activity levels (Cohen's d = 0.144, 95% CI: 0.024, 0.264) and higher
levels of restoration (Cohen's d = 0.339, 95% CI: 0.072, 0.606). Being in more
contact with blue space was significantly associated with higher levels of
restoration (Cohen's d = 0.191, 95% CI: 0.084, 0.298). There is also evidence
that blue spaces improve environmental factors, but more studies are necessary
for meta-analyses to be conducted. Evidence is conflicting on the mediating
effects of social interaction and further research is required on this
hypothesised pathway. Blue spaces may offer part of a solution to public health
concerns faced by growing global urban populations.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18052486 
PMCID: PMC7967635
PMID: 33802522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Mar 10;18(6). pii: 2801. doi:
10.3390/ijerph18062801.

Effects of Lifestyle Changes on the Mental Health of Healthcare Workers with
Different Sense of Coherence Levels in the Era of COVID-19 Pandemic.

Tanaka K(1), Tahara M(1)(2), Mashizume Y(1), Takahashi K(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kitasato University, Kanagawa 252-0373,
Japan.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation Therapist, Saiseikai Higashikanagawa
Rehabilitation Hospital, Kanagawa 221-0822, Japan.
(3)Department of Occupational Therapy, School of Allied Health Sciences, Kitasato
University, Kanagawa 252-0373, Japan.

Sense of coherence (SOC) is a psychological factor that contributes to mental
health maintenance under stressful environment. Likewise, level of SOC might
affect mental health among healthcare workers during the COVID-19 pandemic
differently. In this study, we investigated the relationships between lifestyle
changes and mental health (General Health Questionnaire-12: GHQ-12) among
different level of SOC (weak, moderate, or strong by SOC-13). The data of 898
healthcare workers from cross-sectional survey dataset were extracted and
analyzed. As results, based on GHQ-12 score, 86.1% of 244 participants with weak 
SOC, 60.1% of 606 participants with moderate SOC, and 31.3% of 48 participants
with strong SOC had poor mental health. Both SOC levels and lifestyle changes
(except alcohol consumption) had significant main effects on the GHQ-12 score.
Analysis on the association between lifestyle changes and mental health status
stratified by SOC level reveled that among participants with weak SOC, those who 
increased their leisure and activity time had reduced odds of poor mental health 
than those who made no changes (OR: 0.08, CI: 0.01 to 0.64). Healthcare workers
with weak SOC were at risk of poor mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic,
and lifestyle changes may improve their mental health.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18062801 
PMCID: PMC8001724
PMID: 33801912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Psychol Health Med. 2021 Mar 31:1-9. doi: 10.1080/13548506.2021.1906436. [Epub
ahead of print]

How does stress affect life satisfaction during the COVID-19 pandemic? Moderated 
mediation analysis of sense of coherence and fear of coronavirus.

Dymecka J(1), Gerymski R(1), Machnik-Czerwik A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Psychology and Quality of Life, Institute of Psychology, 
Opole University, Opole, Poland.

The aim of the present study was to determine the relationship between fear of
COVID-19, stress, sense of coherence, and life satisfaction during the
coronavirus pandemic. Participants were 907 Polish people (522 women and 385
men). We used the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS-10), Fear of COVID-19 Scale
(FOC-6), Sense of Coherence Scale (SOC-29) and the Satisfaction with Life Scale. 
The relationship between stress and life satisfaction was mediated by the sense
of coherence, and the relationship between stress and sense of coherence was
moderated by fear of COVID-19. The fear of COVID-19 acted as a buffer in the
relationship between stress and sense of coherence weakening the impact of stress
on the sense of coherence. This study is the first to verify the proposed model
of moderated mediation during the COVID-19 pandemic and was undertaken in a very 
large sample. This manuscript highlights the important role of the fear of
COVID-19 and sense of coherence in our well-being. An individual's sense of
coherence can affect their subjective well-being and help them to effectively
manage stress and reduce anxiety.

DOI: 10.1080/13548506.2021.1906436 
PMID: 33784897 


92. Med Humanit. 2021 Mar 29. pii: medhum-2020-012111. doi:
10.1136/medhum-2020-012111. [Epub ahead of print]

'From disaster, miracles are wrought': a narrative analysis of UK media
depictions of remote GP consulting in the COVID-19 pandemic using Burke's pentad.

Mroz G(1), Papoutsi C(2), Greenhalgh T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Primary Care Health Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)Primary Care Health Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
trish.greenhalgh@phc.ox.ac.uk.

During crises (major events characterised by uncertainty, urgency and threat),
society must make sense of rapidly unfolding events. This happens mainly through 
narrativising-depicting a setting, characters and a meaningful sequence of events
and actions unfolding over time. In the early months of the pandemic, UK general 
practice shifted from face-to-face consultations to a remote-by-default model
(telephone, video or e-consultation). This shift was initially widely accepted by
press and public, but support waned after a politician declared that the change
would be permanent. We invoke Burke's dramatistic pentad of act, scene, agent,
agency and purpose to theorise findings from a detailed analysis of media
coverage of the remote-by-default policy and reactions to it. We consider the 12 
weeks from March to June 2020 (first lockdown, when remote-by-default services
had just been introduced) and 1 week from late July 2020 (following the
ministerial announcement). The initial introduction of remote consulting had
strong narrative coherence in which all parts of the pentad were balanced: scene 
(a deadly virus threatening the country) aligned with act (lockdown, including
avoiding face-to-face appointments unless essential), agents (the National Health
Service and digital technology as heroic macro-actors), agency (general
practitioners 'deployed') and purpose (to control the pandemic). The later
period, however, was characterised by a mismatch between scene (a country
emerging from lockdown and resuming normal life), act (imposition of the remote
model), agent (a politician known for his enthusiasm for technology), agency
(top-down directive) and purpose (modernisation). Whereas media narratives in the
first period aligned with the genre of heroic adventure (suggesting a worthy
battle, bravely fought), those of the second had characteristics of farce
(something both comic and grotesque). We conclude that close reading of media
narratives may surface potential misalignments between policy decisions and the
context in which they must be implemented.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/medhum-2020-012111 
PMCID: PMC8008912
PMID: 33782180 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


93. Inquiry. 2021 Jan-Dec;58:469580211005192. doi: 10.1177/00469580211005192.

Influence of Striving for Work-Life Balance and Sense of Coherence on Intention
to Leave Among Nurses: A 6-Month Prospective Survey.

Matsuo M(1), Suzuki E(2), Takayama Y(3), Shibata S(4), Sato K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Tokyo Healthcare University, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)International University of Health and Welfare Graduate School, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Kawasaki City College of Nursing, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan.
(4)Kyorin University, Mitaka, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Shoin University, Atsugi, Kanagawa, Japan.

The increase in the elderly population in need of healthcare services has led to 
a serious shortage in the nursing workforce. To retain a large nursing workforce,
a strong work-life balance among nurses is needed along with a healthy work
environment. This prospective study investigates the influence of work-life
balance and sense of coherence on intention to leave among hospital nurses. A
questionnaire survey was conducted with 2239 nurses as a baseline. The
explanatory variables included striving for work-life balance behavior, a sense
of coherence in terms of personal resources, and work-, organizational-, and
individual-related factors. Using a cohort of 1368 valid responses, we measured
intention to leave among 975 nurses with whom we were able to follow up 6 months 
after the baseline survey. We then performed multiple regression analysis. The
behavior striving for work-life balance was shown to influence nurses' intention 
to leave. Nurses who exhibited less striving for work-life balance behavior
showed higher intentions to leave. The sense of coherence was not identified as a
factor affecting intention to leave. Securing a comfortable work-life balance
would reduce the nurses' desire to quit the hospital. To reduce nurse turnover,
nurse managers should develop support programs that can help nurses achieve a
better work-life balance.

DOI: 10.1177/00469580211005192 
PMID: 33769128 


94. Front Neurol. 2021 Mar 9;12:640719. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2021.640719. eCollection
2021.

Optical Coherence Tomography Angiography for the Evaluation of Retinal
Vasculature in Fabry Disease: Our Experience and Review of Current Knowledge.

Bacherini D(1), Vicini G(1), Nicolosi C(1), Tanini I(2), Lenzetti C(1), Finocchio
L(1), Cirami LC(3), Dervishi E(3), Rizzo S(4)(5), Virgili G(1)(6), Giansanti
F(1)(6), Sodi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eye Clinic, Neuromuscular and Sense Organs Department, Careggi University
Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(2)Cardiomyopathy Unit, Department of Cardiology, Careggi University Hospital,
Florence, Italy.
(3)Nephrology Dialysis Transplant Unit, Medical Geriatric Department, Careggi
University Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(4)Ophthalmology Unit, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Fondazione
Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, Rome, Italy.
(5)Consiglio Nazionale della Ricerca (CNR), Pisa, Italy.
(6)Department of Neurosciences, Psychology, Drug Research and Child Health,
University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

Purpose: Optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) is a non-invasive and
objective tool for the evaluation of the retinal microvascular changes in Fabry
disease (FD). We investigated changes in retinal vasculature in FD patients, and 
the possible correlation with systemic parameters, by using OCTA, and reviewed
the current status of literature. Methods: Thirteen FD patients (eight females,
five males, mean age 49.85 ± 14.7 years) were compared with 13 age- and
sex-matched healthy controls. OCTA 3 × 3 mm macular scans were performed in all
subjects. We evaluated the vessel density and vessel perfusion in distinct
macular areas (whole, inner, and outer) of both the superficial capillary plexus 
(SCP VD and SCP VP) and of the deep capillary plexus (DCP VD and DCP VP). We also
evaluated the foveal avascular zone (FAZ) metrics (area, perimeter, and
circularity), and correlation between systemic and OCTA parameters. A literature 
review on the current understanding of OCTA in FD is then presented. Results: FD 
patients showed significantly lower SCP VD values in the whole area (17.37 ± 2.08
mm-1 vs. 18.54 ± 1.21 mm-1; p-value 0.022), as well as in the outer area (17.46 ±
2.10 mm-1 vs. 19.08 ± 1.14 mm-1; p-value 0.002), but not in the inner. Even the
DCP VD was significantly lower in all the imaged areas: whole (17.75 ± 3.93 mm-1 
vs. 19.71 ± 1.20 mm-1; p-value 0.024), outer (18.25 ± 4.17 mm-1 vs. 20.33 ± 1.20 
mm-1; p-value 0.023), and inner (19.54 ± 4.17 mm-1 vs. 21.96 ± 1.55 mm-1; p-value
0.011). There were no significant differences in vessel perfusion parameters
(both SCP VP and DCP VP ones) and FAZ. No significant correlations were found
between the OCTA parameters and systemic parameters (maximal left ventricular
wall thickness and glomerular filtration rate) in FD patients. Conclusions: OCTA 
can be considered as a promising non-invasive tool, which enables a quantitative 
evaluation of retinal vascular involvement in FD, despite the varying data
reported in literature. Our results support the use of OCTA as an objective tool 
to evaluate retinal vascular abnormalities in FD. The utility of OCTA in FD needs
to be validated by longitudinal studies taking into account the overall
progression of the disease.

Copyright © 2021 Bacherini, Vicini, Nicolosi, Tanini, Lenzetti, Finocchio,
Cirami, Dervishi, Rizzo, Virgili, Giansanti and Sodi.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2021.640719 
PMCID: PMC7985262
PMID: 33767663 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


95. Ital J Pediatr. 2021 Mar 25;47(1):76. doi: 10.1186/s13052-021-01031-6.

The implications of complexity, systems thinking and philosophy for
pediatricians.

Ehrich J(1), Manemann J(2), Tasic V(3), DeSanto NG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Straße 1, 30625,
Hannover, Germany. ehrich.jochen@mh-hannover.de.
(2)Hanover Research Institute for Philosophy, Hannover, Germany.
(3)University Children's Hospital, Medical School, Skopje, North Macedonia.
(4)University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy.

National service systems in child healthcare are characterized by diversity and
complexity. Primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary healthcare services
create complex networks covering pediatric subspecialties, psychology, sociology,
economics and politics. Can pediatrics exist without philosophy? Does the absence
of integrating philosophical perspectives during conceptualization of pediatric
care contribute to deficiencies in the service systems structuring child
healthcare? Philosophy offers new ways of complex systems thinking in scientific 
and clinical pediatrics. Philosophy could improve coping strategies on different 
levels when dealing with ethics of research projects, individual child healthcare
and crises of healthcare service systems. Boundary and ultimate situations
experienced by severely sick children require help, hope and resilience. Patients
and families as well as pediatricians and other caregivers must act in concert.
All of them may benefit from consulting with philosophers. The aim of this
article is to point out the risks of a strict separation of scientific insight
and sensory experience affecting child healthcare in our modern society, which is
dominated by technology, competition and lack of equity and time.

DOI: 10.1186/s13052-021-01031-6 
PMCID: PMC7993893
PMID: 33766070 


96. Sci Stud Read. 2021;25(2):141-158. doi: 10.1080/10888438.2020.1831503. Epub 2020 
Oct 19.

The Process and Product of Coherence Monitoring in Young Readers: Effects of
Reader and Text Characteristics.

Currie NK(1), Francey G(1), Davies R(1), Gray S(2), Bridges MS(3), Restrepo
MA(2), Thompson MS(4), Ciraolo MF(2), Hu J(5), Cain K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK.
(2)College of Health Solutions, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA.
(3)Department of Hearing and Speech, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas 
City, Kansas, USA.
(4)Denny Sanford School of Social and Family Dynamics, Arizona State University, 
Tempe, Arizona, USA.
(5)Department of Biostatistics & Data Science, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA.

We examined sixth graders' detection of inconsistencies in narrative and
expository passages, contrasting participants who were monolingual speakers (N = 
85) or Spanish-English DLLs (N = 94) when recruited in pre-kindergarten (PK). We 
recorded self-paced reading times and judgments about whether the text made
sense, and took an independent measure of word reading. Main findings were that
inconsistency detection was better for narratives, for participants who were
monolingual speakers in PK, and for those who were better word readers. When the 
text processing demands were increased by separating the inconsistent sentence
and its premise with filler sentences there was a stronger signal for
inconsistency detection during reading for better word readers. Reading patterns 
differed for texts for which children reported an inconsistency compared to those
for which they did not, indicating a failure to adequately monitor for coherence 
while reading. Our performance measures indicate that narrative and expository
texts make different demands on readers.

DOI: 10.1080/10888438.2020.1831503 
PMCID: PMC7986958
PMID: 33762813 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors have no
conflicts of interest to declare.


97. Gac Sanit. 2021 Mar 20. pii: S0213-9111(21)00042-X. doi:
10.1016/j.gaceta.2021.01.006. [Epub ahead of print]

[Community health decision-making through the assets mapping].

[Article in Spanish]

Pou-Martí N(1), Oliveras-Casadellà S(2), Batlle-Amat P(2), Del Acebo Peña X(2),
Estrada-Ocon M(2), Juvinyà-Canal D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cátedra de Promoción de la Salud, Universidad de Girona, Girona, España.
(2)Organisme de Salut Pública de la Diputació de Girona (Dipsalut), Girona,
España.
(3)Cátedra de Promoción de la Salud, Universidad de Girona, Girona, España.
Electronic address: dolors.juvinya@udg.edu.

This is a report about the experience on redefining the health asset mapping
methodology. The aim of this experience consisted of making an analysis on health
inequalities, as well as of using it as a tool in decision-making participative
processes in the local administration area. Thus, a replicable procedure for all 
ages and groups was designed. Besides this, assets have been widely classified,
in accordance with the territorial distribution, people's profiles and asset
features. Both the upload of data to a geographical information system and the
large amount of data gathered allowed us to enlarge the common interpretation of 
data and present the information in a dynamic way.

Copyright © 2021 SESPAS. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2021.01.006 
PMID: 33757691 


98. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2021 Mar 10;95. pii: e202103038.

[Healthier decisions. Nudges.]

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Guix Oliver J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Anthropology Research Centre (MARC). Universitat Rovira i Virgili.
Tarragona. España.

This paper intends to raise the potential interest that the principles and
experiences of the so-called behavioral economy have in the field of public
health and, more specifically, in behavioral changes, thus substituting harmful
behaviors to health for salutogenic behaviors while respecting the final freedom 
of choice of the person. In this article, we review the foundations of behavioral
economics, emphasizing the work of Tversky and Kahneman and their approach to
prospective theory and the role of brain activity levels 1 (automatic) and 2
(reflective) in decision making process. On the basis of these approaches, Thaler
and Sustein identify a series of biases that will be used as tools to facilitate 
behavioral changes through a set of actions "that modify people's behavior in a
predictable way without prohibiting any option or significantly changing their
economic incentives" based on the so-called libertarian paternalism. We review
its interest in public health, citing some empirical studies that demonstrate its
high level of effectiveness and efficiency, reflected in the creation of Nudge
Units in various countries, and concluding that this can be an interesting tool
to add (not to replace) the classical techniques of health promotion and disease 
prevention.

Publisher: Se pretende plantear el potencial interés que los principios y
experiencias de la denominada economía conductual tienen en el terreno de la
salud pública y, más concretamente, en los cambios conductuales, substituyendo
conductas nocivas para la salud por conductas salutogénicas, respetando la
libertad final de elección de la persona. En el artículo revisamos las bases de
la economía conductual, haciendo hincapié en los trabajos de Tversky y Kahneman, 
con su planteamiento de la teoría prospectiva y el rol de los niveles de
actividad cerebral 1 (automático) y 2 (reflexivo) en la toma de decisiones. A
partir de estos planteamientos Thaler y Sustein identifican una serie de sesgos
que serán utilizados como herramientas para facilitar los cambios conductuales
mediante un conjunto de actuaciones “que modifican la conducta de las personas de
una manera predecible sin prohibir ninguna opción ni cambiar de forma
significativa sus incentivos económicos” basándose en el denominado paternalismo 
libertario. Revisamos su interés en salud pública, citando algunos estudios
empíricos que demuestran su alto nivel de efectividad y eficiencia, plasmado en
la creación de Unidades de Nudges en diversos países, y llegando a la conclusión 
de que esta puede ser una herramienta interesante para añadir, no para
substituir, a las técnicas clásicas de la promoción de la salud y la prevención
de la enfermedad.

PMID: 33750758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Lancet. 2021 Mar 20;397(10279):1054-1055. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00585-7.

Human flourishing in a health-creating society.

Crisp N(1).

Author information: 
(1)House of Lords, Houses of Parliament, London SW1A 0PW, UK. Electronic address:
crisp@parliament.uk.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00585-7 
PMID: 33743858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Front Psychol. 2021 Mar 2;12:624949. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.624949. eCollection 
2021.

Strategies for Coping With Stress in Athletes During the COVID-19 Pandemic and
Their Predictors.

Szczypińska M(1), Samełko A(1), Guszkowska M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Physical Education, Józef Piłsudski University of Physical
Education in Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Faculty of Rehabilitation, Józef Piłsudski University of Physical Education in
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.

The aim of the study was to compare the strategies of coping with stress during
the COVID-19 epidemic in athletes involved in Olympic preparations (57 potential 
Olympians) and students of physical education (54 extramural students), and to
determine their depending on the variable gender. The research was conducted in
the form of an on-line survey in the period of April 7-28 during the COVID-19
pandemic. Four standard psychological questionnaires were used. Elite athletes
and physical education students practicing sports most often dealt with the
stress of the COVID-19 pandemic using cognitive and behavioral coping strategies.
The sports level depended on the strategies of coping with the stress of the
COVID-19 pandemic more strongly than gender. The relationship between the sense
of coherence (mainly comprehensibility) and the hope for success treated as a
generalized immune resource with coping strategies in the case of the COVID-19
pandemic postulated by Antonovsky was confirmed.

Copyright © 2021 Szczypińska, Samełko and Guszkowska.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.624949 
PMCID: PMC7960646
PMID: 33737896 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


101. BMC Fam Pract. 2021 Mar 18;22(1):53. doi: 10.1186/s12875-021-01407-x.

Social prescribing for people with complex needs: a realist evaluation.

Wood E(1), Ohlsen S(2), Fenton SJ(3), Connell J(2), Weich S(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health and Related Research, The University of Sheffield, Regent
Court, 30 Regent Street, Sheffield, S1 4DA, UK. e.f.wood@sheffield.ac.uk.
(2)School of Health and Related Research, The University of Sheffield, Regent
Court, 30 Regent Street, Sheffield, S1 4DA, UK.
(3)Institute for Mental Health, School of Social Policy, University of
Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.

BACKGROUND: Social Prescribing is increasingly popular, and several evaluations
have shown positive results. However, Social Prescribing is an umbrella term that
covers many different interventions. We aimed to test, develop and refine a
programme theory explaining the underlying mechanisms operating in Social
Prescribing to better enhance its effectiveness by allowing it to be targeted to 
those who will benefit most, when they will benefit most.
METHODS: We conducted a realist evaluation of a large Social Prescribing
organisation in the North of England. Thirty-five interviews were conducted with 
stakeholders (clients attending Social Prescribing, Social Prescribing staff and 
general practice staff). Through an iterative process of analysis, a series of
context-mechanism-outcome configurations were developed, refined and retested at 
a workshop of 15 stakeholders. The initial programme theory was refined, retested
and 'applied' to wider theory.
RESULTS: Social Prescribing in this organisation was found to be only
superficially similar to collaborative care. A complex web of contexts,
mechanisms and outcomes for its clients are described. Key elements influencing
outcomes described by stakeholders included social isolation and wider
determinants of health; poor interagency communication for people with multiple
needs. Successful Social Prescribing requires a non-stigmatising environment and 
person-centred care, and shares many features described by the asset-based theory
of Salutogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: The Social Prescribing model studied is holistic and person-centred 
and as such enables those with a weak sense of coherence to strengthen this,
access resistance resources, and move in a health promoting or salutogenic
direction.

DOI: 10.1186/s12875-021-01407-x 
PMCID: PMC7977569
PMID: 33736591 


102. Front Psychol. 2021 Feb 25;12:618343. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.618343. eCollection
2021.

Autobiographical Meaning Making Protects the Sense of Self-Continuity Past Forced
Migration.

Camia C(1), Zafar R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Zayed University, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
(2)Psychology Program, New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, United Arab
Emirates.

Forced migration changes people's lives and their sense of self-continuity
fundamentally. One memory-based mechanism to protect the sense of self-continuity
and psychological well-being is autobiographical meaning making, enabling
individuals to explain change in personality and life by connecting personal
experiences and other distant parts of life to the self and its development.
Aiming to replicate and extend prior research, the current study investigated
whether autobiographical meaning making has the potential to support the sense of
self-continuity in refugees. We therefore collected life narratives from 31
refugees that were coded for autobiographical reasoning, self-event connections, 
and global narrative coherence. In line with prior research, results suggest that
autobiographical meaning making relates to a higher sense of self-continuity and 
less psychological distress. Yet, if refugees experienced many continuing
postdisplacement stressors in addition to their forced displacement,
autobiographical meaning making was associated with higher self-discontinuity and
greater psychological distress, especially with trauma-related symptoms such as
memory intrusion and hyperarousal. Altogether, results indicate that
autobiographical meaning making helps to compensate the effects of extreme
biographical disruptions on the sense of self-continuity, as long as the stress
caused by the biographical change is not overwhelming or too protracted.

Copyright © 2021 Camia and Zafar.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.618343 
PMCID: PMC7959802
PMID: 33732188 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor declared a 
past co-authorship with one of the authors CC.


103. J Community Psychol. 2021 Mar 17. doi: 10.1002/jcop.22544. [Epub ahead of print]

Living in opposition: How women in the United States cope in spite of mistrust of
federal leadership during the pandemic of Covid-19.

Hardy LJ(1)(2), Mana A(3), Mundell L(1)(2), Benheim S(4), Morales KT(1)(2), Sagy 
S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona,
USA.
(2)Department of Anthropology, Social Science Community Engagement Lab, Northern 
Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA.
(3)Behavioral Science, Peres Academic Center, Rehovot, Israel.
(4)Martin Springer Center for Conflict Studies, Ben Gurion University of the
Negev, Beersheba, Israel.
(5)Department of Education, Martin Springer Center for Conflict Studies, Ben
Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel.

International research collaborators conducted research investigating
sociocultural responses to the Covid-19 pandemic. Our mixed methods research
design includes surveys and interviews conducted between March and September of
2020 including 249 of 506 survey responses and 18 of 50 in-depth, exploratory,
semi-structured interviews with self-defined politically left-leaning women in
the United States. We employ a sequential design to analyze statistical and
qualitative data. Despite international data suggesting that trust in federal
governments reduces anxiety, women who did not trust and actively opposed the
Trump administration reported lower levels of anxiety than expected. Results
indicate reliance on and development of new forms of connection that seem to
mitigate symptomatic anxieties when living in opposition. Women living in
opposition to the leadership of the federal government use and develop resources 
to help them cope. Research on coping strategies and mental health and anxiety
during crisis can inform recommendations for ways to support and strengthen sense
of coherence during tumultuous times.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jcop.22544 
PMCID: PMC8251460
PMID: 33729586 


104. Front Psychol. 2021 Feb 24;12:627547. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.627547. eCollection
2021.

Meaning in Life: A Major Predictive Factor for Loneliness Comparable to Health
Status and Social Connectedness.

Macià D(1)(2)(3), Cattaneo G(2)(4), Solana J(2)(4), Tormos JM(2)(4),
Pascual-Leone A(2)(5)(6), Bartrés-Faz D(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Medicina, Facultat de Medicina i Ciències de la Salut i
Institut de Neurociències, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Oficina de Recerca i Innovació, Institut Guttmann, Institut Universitari de
Neurorehabilitació adscrit a la UAB, Badalona, Spain.
(3)Departament de Biomedicina, Facultat de Medicina i Ciències de la Salut i
Institut de Neurociències, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Departament de Medicina, Universitat Autónoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain.
(5)Hinda and Arthur Marcus Institute for Aging Research and Deanna and Sidney
Wolk Center for Memory Health, Hebrew SeniorLife, Boston, MA, United States.
(6)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.

Objective: Loneliness is the subjective distress of feeling alone and has a
strong impact on wellbeing and health. In addition to well-known predictors like 
isolation and poor health, a better understanding of the psychological
determinants of loneliness would offer effective targets for future complementary
interventions. Methods: In this cross-sectional observational study (N = 2,240), 
we compared the explanatory power of several important risk factors of loneliness
with the affective, motivational, and cognitive aspects of the Meaning in Life
(MiL) construct. Different nested linear models were compared including
socio-demographic, lifestyles, social-connectedness, and self-rated health
variables, to assess the overlapping and non-overlapping explanatory power of
each of them. Results: Health status and MiL were found to be the most important 
predictors of loneliness, followed by social connectedness and, with a much lower
weight, lifestyles, and socio-demographic factors. Within the MiL factor, the
most cognitive component, sense of coherence, had a greater explanatory power
than the more affective and motivational ones. Conclusion: Reduced MiL, the
capacity of an individual to attach "value and significance" to life, is a
crucial predictor to the feeling of loneliness. These results suggest that
programs aiming to combat loneliness should go well beyond situational
interventions and include more cognitive, value-centered interventions that
enable individuals to define and pursue a meaningful vital plan.

Copyright © 2021 Macià, Cattaneo, Solana, Tormos, Pascual-Leone and Bartrés-Faz.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.627547 
PMCID: PMC7943478
PMID: 33716892 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


105. BMC Nurs. 2021 Mar 11;20(1):40. doi: 10.1186/s12912-021-00562-x.

Female nursing graduate students' stress and health: the mediating effects of
sense of coherence and social support.

Jeong YJ(1), Koh CK(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Nursing, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
jungyj90@snu.ac.kr.
(2)College of Nursing & The Research Institute of Nursing Science, Seoul National
University, 103 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul, 03080, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Ninety-five percent of nursing graduate students in South Korea are
women, and most are often engaged in both academic coursework and work outside of
the academic environment. Nursing graduate students often experience stress
leading to physical and mental health problems that negatively affect their
academic performance and persistence during graduate programs. The purpose of
this study was to test multiple mediation effects of sense of coherence (SOC) and
social support in the relationship between stress and health status of nursing
graduate students.
METHODS: The participants of this study were 231 female nursing graduate students
from 14 universities. Data were collected using an online survey conducted
between August and October 2019. Bootstrap techniques using the PROCESS macro for
SPSS software were applied to assess the multi-mediating effects.
RESULTS: The total effect (B = - 12.29, p < .001) and direct effect (B = - 7.07, 
p < .001) of perceived stress on health status were significant. Perceived stress
had negative direct effects on social support (B = - 0.41, p < .001) and SOC
(B = - 5.77, p < .001). SOC had a positive direct effect on health status
(B = 0.59, p < .001). However, social support was not a significant predictor of 
health status (B = 1.24, p = .232). In addition, there was a positive direct
effect of social support on SOC (B = 5.23, p < .001). Furthermore, the indirect
effect of perceived stress on health status through SOC was significant
(B = - 3.42, 95% CI = - 5.2616, - 1.8906). There was also a significant indirect 
effect of perceived stress on health status through social support and SOC
(B = - 1.28, 95% CI = - 2.1663, - 0.5992).
CONCLUSION: It is necessary to create strategies that enhance nursing graduate
students' SOC and social support to reduce their perceived stress and to improve 
their health status.

DOI: 10.1186/s12912-021-00562-x 
PMCID: PMC7948324
PMID: 33706771 


106. Int J Circumpolar Health. 2021 Dec;80(1):1893534. doi:
10.1080/22423982.2021.1893534.

A sense of health and coherence in young rural schoolchildren in Sweden.

Randell E(1), Udo C(1)(2)(3), Warne M(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Education, Health and Social Studies, Dalarna University, Falun,
Sweden.
(2)Center for Clinical Research (CKF), Dalarna, Sweden.
(3)Department of Health Care Sciences, Palliative Research Centre, Ersta Sköndal 
Bräcke University College, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Health Sciences, Mid Sweden University, Östersund, Sweden.

Background: Little is known about how younger schoolchildren in a rural setting
experience their sense of coherence (SOC), how they think and reason about health
and what they perceive as important to achieve health goals. This study aimed to 
investigate children's SOC and their health perceptions.Method: In this
mixed-method study 94 children (8-12 years) from three rural schools answered
several questionnaires: The Child-SOC (CSOC), Positive Health Scale (PHS) and
Cantril's ladder of life scale. Another 23 children (of 94) participated in four 
focus group interviews. Thematic analysis was used to identify themes from the
interview transcripts.Results: High SOC was reported by 48% of the boys and 22%
of the girls. However, no significant gender differences were found. Four themes 
were generated from the qualitative analysis: Understanding health, Managing
health, Doing bodily health and Socialising health. Both younger and older
children had a holistic view of health in which health was seen as an
individual's living habits in which social contacts mattered.Conclusion: In a
rural context children need to adapt to activities that exist in their immediate 
environment. Thus, activities during school hours can be an important complement 
in health promotion.

DOI: 10.1080/22423982.2021.1893534 
PMCID: PMC7954475
PMID: 33704012 


107. Front Psychol. 2021 Feb 18;12:637349. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.637349. eCollection
2021.

Hope and Resilience During a Pandemic Among Three Cultural Groups in Israel: The 
Second Wave of Covid-19.

Braun-Lewensohn O(1), Abu-Kaf S(1), Kalagy T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Conflict Management & Resolution Program, Department of Interdisciplinary
Studies, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(2)Department of Public Policy & Management, Guilford Glazer Faculty of Business 
and Management, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.

The aim of this study was to explore the coping resources of hope and sense of
coherence, which are rooted in positive-psychology theory, as potential
resilience factors that might reduce the emotional distress experienced by adults
from three cultural groups in Israel during the chronic-stress situation of a
pandemic. The three cultural groups examined were secular Jews, Ultra-Orthodox
Jews, and Arabs. We compared these cultural groups during the second wave of the 
Covid-19 pandemic, just before the Jewish New Year (mid-September 2020) as a
second lockdown was announced. Data were gathered from 248 secular Jews, 243
Ultra-Orthodox Jews, and 203 Arabs, who were 18-70 years old (M = 37.14, SD =
12.62). The participants filled out self-reported questionnaires including the
Brief Symptom Inventory as a measure of emotional/psychological distress (i.e.,
somatization, depression, and anxiety) and questionnaires about sense of
coherence and different types of hope (i.e., intrapersonal, interpersonal, and
transpersonal) as measures of coping resources and resiliency. Differences were
found between the three groups in terms of several variables. The Arab
participants reported the highest levels of emotional distress and the lowest
levels of interpersonal and transpersonal hope; whereas the Ultra-Orthodox
participants revealed the highest levels of sense of coherence and other
resilience factors. A structural equation model revealed that, in addition to the
sociodemographic factors, only sense of coherence and intrapersonal hope played
significant roles in explaining emotional distress, explaining 60% of the
reported distress among secular Jews, 41% among Ultra-Orthodox Jews, and 48%
among Arabs. We discuss our findings in light of the salutogenic and hope
theories. We will also discuss their relevancy to meaning-seeking and
self-transcendence theory in the three cultural groups.

Copyright © 2021 Braun-Lewensohn, Abu-Kaf and Kalagy.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.637349 
PMCID: PMC7930000
PMID: 33679564 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor declared a 
past co-authorship with one of the authors OB-L.


108. Nihon Koshu Eisei Zasshi. 2021 Apr 23;68(4):241-254. doi: 10.11236/jph.20-008.
Epub 2021 Mar 5.

[Development and testing of reliability and validity of a subjective QOL scale
for older adults perceiving a dynamic healthy life through the three dimensions
of biological life, everyday life, and overall course of life].

[Article in Japanese]

Yoshida S(1)(2), Yamazaki Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Student at Nihon Fukushi University Graduate School.
(2)Social Medical Corporation Yamatokai Foundation, Kusaka Hospital.
(3)Faculty of Social Welfare, Nihon Fukushi University.

Objectives　To develop and assess the reliability and validity of a scale
measuring subjective quality of life (QOL), which encompasses the "strength and
ability" to live positively through the three dimensions of biological life,
everyday life, and overall course of life, in order to support QOL in older
adults.Methods　We reviewed related literature and conducted interviews with
patients with chronic diseases. Participants rated their QOL on a seven-point
scale using the visual analog scale. Interviewer-administered questionnaires were
used to collect data from 100 older adults living in their own homes. The
participants were between the ages of 70 and 84, and were recruited from
comprehensive community support centers or from among hospital outpatients. We
assessed scale reliability using Cronbach's α, item-total (I-T) correlation
analysis, and calculation of α coefficient-if-item-deleted. We examined content
validity by analyzing the content of the free response items. To evaluate
construct validity, we carried out a hierarchical multiple regression analysis,
examined the semantic content of the factors related to subjective QOL, and
confirmed consistency with previous studies.Results　Regarding the reliability
analysis of the scale, the α coefficient was 0.898, and both the I-T correlation 
and α coefficient-if-item-deleted exceeded the minimum value considered reliable.
In examining content validity, the categories extracted for each of the three
dimensions were found to demonstrate the characteristics of the general ideas of 
each dimension of QOL. Thus, the scale was confirmed to have overall content
validity. As for the assessment of validity of its constitutive concepts,
subjective QOL scores were significantly high among participants who had jobs,
had role-related or financial capacity, used two or more nursing services, or
scored high in perceived health competence, social networking, and sense of
coherence (SOC). In addition, "meaningfulness" of SOC, and financial capacity had
significant correlations with subjective QOL. These results are consistent with
past research and therefore confirm construct validity.Conclusion　This study
sufficiently confirmed the reliability and validity of the scale, and
consequently its usability.

DOI: 10.11236/jph.20-008 
PMID: 33678759 


109. J Health Care Poor Underserved. 2021;32(1):423-434. doi: 10.1353/hpu.2021.0032.

Impact of Parents' Sense of Coherence on Children's Oral Health-Related Behaviors
and Dental Caries Experience among Newcomers.

Elyasi M, Abtahi M, Kornerup I, Amin M.

PURPOSE: To examine the relationship between parents' sense of coherence (SOC)
and children's oral health outcomes among newcomers (immigrants to Canada).
METHODS: Immigrant parents with children aged 1-12 years who lived in Canada for 
10 years or less were recruited. Outcome variables included children's caries
experience (DMFT/dmft) and oral health-related behaviors (frequency of
toothbrushing, sugar intake, and dental visits). Parents SOC was measured.
RESULTS: Among 274 parents: mean (SD) age 34.92 (6.35) years; 57% post-secondary 
education; 38% monthly income below $2000; and 41% living in Canada for less than
five years. Children: mean (SD) age 4.5 (2.9) years; 55% born in Canada; 42%
dental coverage; 52% untreated caries. The mean (SD) of parents' SOC was 59.1
(12.03). Sense of coherence scores were not significantly associated with
children's caries experience and oral health behaviors.
CONCLUSIONS: Parent's SOC was relatively low among newcomers and not associated
with children's oral health outcomes.

DOI: 10.1353/hpu.2021.0032 
PMID: 33678705 


110. West J Nurs Res. 2021 Mar 6:193945921994523. doi: 10.1177/0193945921994523. [Epub
ahead of print]

Sense of Coherence, Psychological Distress, and Disability Acceptance in
Colostomy Cancer Survivors.

Liu H(1), Wang M(1), Li X(2), Zhao Q(3), Li J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Xi'an Jiaotong University City College, Xi'an, Shaanxi 
Province, China.
(2)Faculty of Nursing, Health Science Center, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an,
China.
(3)The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.

This study aimed to investigate the status of sense of coherence (SOC),
acceptance of disability (AD) and psychological distress (PD) of patients with
permanent colostomy and evaluate the role of AD in mediating the relationship
between SOC and PD. Cross-sectional data were collected from 162 patients with
permanent colostomy at stoma care outpatient clinic. Structural Equation Model of
the SOC, AD, and PD was established to examine the mediating effect. Results
indicated that the SOC and AD of patients with permanent colostomy were both at a
low level, and PD was common in patients. In addition, a partial mediating effect
of AD between SOC and PD was verified. Enhancing the SOC and AD of patients with 
permanent colostomy could be essential for alleviating their PD.

DOI: 10.1177/0193945921994523 
PMID: 33678069 


111. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Feb 20;18(4). pii: 2057. doi:
10.3390/ijerph18042057.

The Use of Online CB-ART Interventions in the Context of COVID-19: Enhancing
Salutogenic Coping.

Segal-Engelchin D(1), Huss E(1), Sarid O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Spitzer Department of Social Work, Ben- Gurion University of the Negev, P.O.
Box 653, Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel.

Community crises require the provision of short-term reflective intervention
methods to help service users identify stressors, and access and intensify their 
adaptive coping. Here, we demonstrate the use of a single-session online
cognitive behavioral- and art-based (CB-ART) intervention within the context of
the COVID-19 pandemic. In this method, the individual draws three images: his/her
COVID-19-related stress, his/her perceived resources, and an integration of
stress and resources. This method provided a reflective space in which
individuals could identify their experienced stressors, acknowledge their coping 
resources, and integrate these two elements within the context of the current
pandemic. In this article, we use illustrative examples from a study implemented 
during the first national lockdown in Israel and present a tool that can be
easily implemented by mental-health professionals in ongoing community crises.
The aims of this intervention were to co-create knowledge with service users,
access their self-defined needs and strengths, and enhance their coping by
enabling them to view stress and coping as part of the salutogenic continuum.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18042057 
PMCID: PMC7923297
PMID: 33672447  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Feb 19;18(4). pii: 2048. doi:
10.3390/ijerph18042048.

Health-Related Social and Ethical Considerations towards the Utilization of
Dental Medical Services by Seniors: Influencing and Protective Factors,
Vulnerability, Resilience and Sense of Coherence.

Nitschke I(1)(2), Hahnel S(1), Jockusch J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Prosthetic Dentistry and Dental Materials Science, Leipzig
University Medical Center, 04103 Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Clinic of General, Special Care and Geriatric Dentistry, Center of Dental
Medicine, University of Zurich, 8032 Zurich, Switzerland.

The aim is to analyze protective and modifying factors (e.g., vulnerability,
resilience, sense of coherence) in relation to the utilization of dental services
by seniors at different levels of the healthcare system. Terminological
imprecision in the use and transfer of existing terms (sense of coherence,
resilience, salutogenesis) to gerodontology is clarified. Factors influencing a
reduced utilization (static/dynamic factors) can occur isolated or in combination
and, thus, model the risk of a reduced utilization of dental services
(influencing-factor mechanism). Protective factors of utilization include
patient-specific factors for self-motivation and factors that promote
oral-health-related resilience. Resistance forces that counteract can be
identified as oral-health-related resilience factors. Achieving social and
individual appreciation and establishing a prevention-oriented approach to
utilization will be increasingly challenging, since the population is becoming
older and access is not equal in terms of opportunity. Resistance forces need to 
be strengthened in an ethical context. Studies should increasingly present
resilience processes, determinants and modes of action at the various interfaces 
in the healthcare system, which can ensure sustainable medical care in old age.
The concepts conveyed here are generally valid and able to point out inequalities
and ageism in access to dental services.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18042048 
PMCID: PMC7922367
PMID: 33669815  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Feb 25;18(5). pii: 2249. doi:
10.3390/ijerph18052249.

Educating on Sexuality to Promote Health: Applied Experiences Mainstreaming the
Gender and Human Rights Approach.

Martínez-Abarca AL(1)(2), Martínez-Pérez AM(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Universidad de las Américas, Quito 170124, Ecuador.
(2)Health Sciences Program, Rey Juan Carlos University, 28032 Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Communication and Sociology, Faculty of Communication,
Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, 28943 Madrid, Spain.

In the articulation between research and health intervention, we see the need to 
situate comprehensive sexuality education in the triangle formed by the
salutogenic approach, the mainstreaming of gender and human rights, and the
development of competencies in health promotion. For this purpose, we present a
set of investigations carried out in Ecuador and Spain through a qualitative
methodology with the respective health interventions that seek to obtain
significant results of the teaching-learning process on sexuality. The field work
contemplates situations of violence as a health problem, orienting the
intervention in health empowerment toward pleasure. The health education
experiences implemented allow us to conclude that comprehensive sexuality
education reinforces the competencies of health personnel to attend to diversity.
These findings, and the results expected in ongoing research, allow us to form a 
competency framework aimed at specifically improving medical education so that
medical professionals can generate health processes with a cross-cutting approach
to gender and human rights.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18052249 
PMCID: PMC7956297
PMID: 33668688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Health Promot Int. 2021 Mar 1. pii: daab020. doi: 10.1093/heapro/daab020. [Epub
ahead of print]

Development of a salutogenic intervention for healthy eating among Dutch type 2
diabetes mellitus patients.

Polhuis KCMM(1), Vaandrager L(1), Soedamah-Muthu SS(2)(3), Koelen MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social Sciences, chair group Health and Society, Wageningen
University and Research, Hollandseweg 1, 6706 KN, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medical and Clinical Psychology, Center of Research on
Psychological and Somatic disorders (CORPS), Tilburg University, Warandelaan 2,
5037 AB, Tilburg, The Netherlands.
(3)Institute for Food, Nutrition and Health, University of Reading, Whiteknights,
Pepper Lane Whiteknights, RG6 6DZ, Reading, UK.

Healthy eating can be challenging for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) patients.
The theory of salutogenesis, which focuses on the resources required to organize 
behavioural changes in everyday life, was used to develop an intervention for
healthy eating. The aim was to describe the development, structure and content of
this salutogenic intervention. The development consisted of two phases that were 
based on the operationalization of important key principles of salutogenesis. In 
Phase 1 (Exploration and synthesis), a systematic review and three qualitative
studies were performed to explore important characteristics to enable healthy
eating in everyday life. The results were used to develop the draft intervention.
In Phase 2 (Validation and adjustment), interviews and workshops were conducted
with T2DM patients, healthcare providers and scientists. Based on this, the draft
intervention was modified into its final form. The developmental process resulted
in a 12-week, group-based intervention that aimed to enable important resources
for healthy eating via self-examination, reflection, setting goals and sharing
experiences. Attention was also paid to disease information, disease acceptance, 
food literacy, stress management, self-identity and social support. The group
sessions began following an individual intake session, with a booster session
held 3 months after the intervention. The researcher's translation of the
stakeholders' priorities into an intervention was corrected for and approved by
the stakeholders concerned. This comprehensive salutogenic intervention was
developed based on practical and scientific evidence. Providing transparency in
developmental processes and content is important because it determines the
scientific integrity and credibility of an intervention.

plain-language-summary: Healthy eating can be difficult for people with the
disease type 2 diabetes. This article describes how a programme aimed at helping 
type 2 diabetes patients to eat healthily was developed. The draft version of the
programme was based on a theoretical framework that aims to understand what
creates health in everyday life, and on conversations with type 2 diabetes
patients and healthcare providers. The draft programme was adjusted based on the 
feedback of type 2 diabetes patients, healthcare providers and scientists. This
resulted in a 12-week, group-based programme that enables people to think about
who they are and what they want by setting health goals and sharing experiences. 
Attention was also paid to disease knowledge, disease acceptance, nutritional
skills, dealing with stress, self-identity and social support. The group sessions
began following an individual intake session, with a booster session held 3
months after the intervention. By involving everybody, we were able to develop a 
programme that takes into account the preferences, needs and priorities of all
stakeholders. It is important to describe the development and the content of
programmes encouraging healthy eating to determine their quality and effectivity.
© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/daab020 
PMID: 33667316 


115. West J Nurs Res. 2021 Mar 5:193945921996648. doi: 10.1177/0193945921996648. [Epub
ahead of print]

Social Support, Sense of Coherence, and Self-Management among Hemodialysis
Patients.

Song YY(1), Chen L(2), Wang WX(3), Yang DJ(1), Jiang XL(1).

Author information: 
(1)West China School of Nursing/West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
Sichuan, China.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Hemodialysis Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

Self-management is essential for patients who require regular hemodialysis
treatment. This study aimed to explore the relationships between social support, 
sense of coherence (SOC), and self-management in hemodialysis patients and to
examine whether SOC plays a mediating role. In a cross-sectional study, 402
hemodialysis patients from four tertiary hospitals were recruited. Data were
analyzed using structural equation modeling. Social support, SOC, and
self-management were significantly correlated with each other. The proposed model
provided a good fit to the data. Social support had a direct effect on
self-management and SOC, partially mediated the effect of social support on
self-management (β = 0.248, p = 0.001). Social support and SOC explained 69% of
the variance in self-management. Our findings indicate that health care providers
can enhance social support with an emphasis on strengthening SOC strategies to
better improve self-management in hemodialysis patients.

DOI: 10.1177/0193945921996648 
PMID: 33666119 


116. BMC Med Educ. 2021 Mar 4;21(1):142. doi: 10.1186/s12909-021-02571-5.

Resilience and sense of coherence in first year medical students - a
cross-sectional study.

Luibl L(1), Traversari J(2), Paulsen F(1), Scholz M(#)(3), Burger P(#)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Functional and Clinical Anatomy, Friedrich-Alexander-University
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Universitätsstr. 19, 91054, Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Institute of Anatomy, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057,
Zürich, Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Functional and Clinical Anatomy, Friedrich-Alexander-University
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Universitätsstr. 19, 91054, Erlangen, Germany.
michael.scholz@fau.de.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Psychiatric University Hospital, Lenggstrasse 31,
8008, Zurich, Switzerland.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: A broad range of studies show that medical students often have a
significantly deteriorated mental health status. Although starting medical school
with values comparable to the population average, only a few semesters later,
medical undergraduates show increased rates of psychological risk states and some
manifest mental illnesses, such as burnout and depression. In our survey we
intentionally assessed mental health parameters from a salutogenetic, i.e.
resource-oriented point of view.
METHODS: We examined first-year medical students in a cross-sectional study and
assessed sense of coherence (SOC) and resilience as parameters from the
salutogenesis model by Antonovsky in a structured way using validated,
self-administered questionnaires. In total, we examined 236 students of human
medicine, dentistry and molecular medicine at the Friedrich-Alexander-University 
Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU).
RESULTS: Our analyses showed significantly higher values of resilience among male
students compared to female students (p < 0.01). In contrast, even though a
significant correlation between resilience and SOC was observed, only a
non-significantly lower value of SOC was found in female students. Compared to
the reference sample our medical students in their first year of study showed
significantly lower values for resilience (p < 0.01) and SOC (p < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Resilience and SOC are known to correlate with psychological stress
(burnout parameters) and depression. In order to keep protective factors like SOC
and resilience in medical students at a good and healthy level we see the
necessity to address that problem proactively and educationally. Integrating
training focused on the preservation of the students´ own mental health into the 
medical curriculum from the beginning of university courses, and throughout the
whole medical study course, is essential and should be an obligatory training
goal. Based on our study results, we also deem it necessary to think about ways
to adapt the measures for the gender-specific needs of our students, e.g.
dependent on their biological gender.

DOI: 10.1186/s12909-021-02571-5 
PMCID: PMC7934430
PMID: 33663468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Vacunas. 2021 May-Aug;22(2):82-88. doi: 10.1016/j.vacun.2021.02.001. Epub 2021
Feb 26.

[The vaccine-condition or vaccination passport and its eventual fit into a broad 
recommended vaccination framework against COVID-19].

[Article in Spanish]

Cierco Seira C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Derecho Público, Universidad de Lleida.

It is important to think about the eventual application of a COVID-19 vaccination
certificate as an eligibility criterion to carry out certain activities and to
discuss in advance the problems that the use of this tool may pose in legal
terms. To this end, we must begin by stating the assumptions that would be
necessary to justify its implantation, including scientific consensus on the
scope of the immunity granted by COVID-19 vaccines, especially in blocking
transmission in the community. Likewise, it emphasizes the importance of
broadening the view in the sense of internalizing that the passport or
vaccination pass constitutes only one of the many options within a rich catalog
of possibilities when it comes to reinforcing the recommended vaccination model
through incentives adopted in the Vaccination Strategy against COVID-19,
including the use of nudging. In any case, if conditionality is installed and
expanded to the extent of significantly influencing daily life, it could lead to 
a kind of indirect obligation, with the risk of dysfunctions in terms of equality
and systemic coherence if the public powers do not contribute to clearly define
the legal limits beforehand and to drive a process that in itself could be
dispersed and disorderly.

© 2021 Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vacun.2021.02.001 
PMCID: PMC7908842
PMID: 33654478 


118. Basic Clin Neurosci. 2020 Sep-Oct;11(5):687-699. doi: 10.32598/bcn.11.5.1670.1.
Epub 2020 Sep 1.

Health Promoting Self-care Behaviors in Patients With Multiple Sclerosis in the
Southeast of Iran: Developing a Model for Practice.

Momenabadi V(1), Kaveh MH(1), Nakhaee N(2), Karimzadeh Shirazi K(3), Sedighi
B(2), Tabatabaei SHR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Education & Promotion, School of Health, Shiraz
University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Neuroscience Research Center, Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Kerman,
Iran.
(3)Department of Health Education and Promotion, School of Health and Nutrition
Sciences, Yasuj University of Medical Sciences, Yasuj, Iran.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Research Center for Health Sciences, School of
Health, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.

Introduction: Promoting self-care practice, as a critical strategy for enhancing 
the quality of life in patients with Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a challenging
issue. This study aimed to propose a model of health-promoting self-care
behaviors in MS patients.
Methods: In this cross-sectional study, 200 patients with MS, who had referred to
the Hospital for Special Diseases in Kerman City, Iran, were chosen. The main
data collection instruments were the multiple sclerosis knowledge questionnaire, 
the Rosenberg self-esteem scale, multiple sclerosis self-efficacy scale,
questionnaire of perceived barriers and benefits of self-care behaviors, social
support, the health promotion lifestyle profile II, and resilience and sense of
coherence scale. Data analysis was conducted in SPSS V. 22 and AMOS18 software.
The Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) was also used for further analysis of
data.
Results: The model explained 82% of variance in Health-Promoting self-care
Behavior (HPB). The results of the final model obtained from the SEM showed that 
self-efficacy (β=0.53, SE=0.04, P= 0.007), self-esteem (β=0.39, SE=0.04,
P=0.005), social support (β=0.36, SE=0.04, P=0.009), sense of coherence (β=0.34, 
SE=0.07, P=0.006), resilience (β=0.33, SE=0.07, P=0.018), and perceived benefits 
(β=0.25, SE=0.05, P=0.009) had a positive and significant relationship with HPB.
Conclusion: The self-care empowerment model in patients with MS presented in this
study can be used as a framework for designing health promotion interventions to 
improve the quality of life of patients with MS.

Copyright© 2020 Iranian Neuroscience Society.

DOI: 10.32598/bcn.11.5.1670.1 
PMCID: PMC7878060
PMID: 33643561 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declared no
conflict of interest.


119. Compr Psychiatry. 2021 Apr;106:152227. doi: 10.1016/j.comppsych.2021.152227. Epub
2021 Feb 18.

Community coherence and acculturation strategies among refugee adolescents: How
do they explain mental-health symptoms?

Abu-Kaf S(1), Al-Said K(2), Braun-Lewensohn O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Conflict Management and Resolution Program, Department of Multidisciplinary
Studies, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba 8410501, Israel.
Electronic address: aks@bgu.ac.il.
(2)Kay Academic College of Education, Beersheba 84536, Israel.
(3)Conflict Management and Resolution Program, Department of Multidisciplinary
Studies, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba 8410501, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Against the backdrop of 10 years of civil war in Syria, with millions
of refugees, this study aimed to explore sense of community coherence and the
acculturation strategies of separation and competition as factors that might
explain mental-health problems among adolescent Syrian refugees in Greece.
METHODS: Data were gathered from 173 adolescents aged 13-18 (M = 15.85;
SD = 1.49); female adolescents accounted for 60.7% of the sample. Participants
filled out a self-reported questionnaire regarding internalizing and
externalizing problems, as well as posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). They
were also asked about their sense of community coherence, their use of different 
acculturation strategies, and sociodemographic factors (i.e., gender, age, amount
of time spent in the camp, and parents' education), as well as contextual factors
such as exposure to war events, appraisal of danger, and whether they had
received aid from various organizations.
RESULTS: The female adolescents reported a stronger sense of community coherence 
and that they had received more aid from organizations than the male adolescents 
reported receiving. The male adolescents reported more externalizing problems.
Exposure and appraisal of danger, as well as sense of community coherence and the
use of the acculturation strategies of separation and competition all
significantly explained the various mental-health problems.
CONCLUSIONS: This article underscores the significance of gender, community
coherence, and acculturation strategies in the prediction of mental health. It
presents the results of this research in the context of the salutogenic and
acculturation models.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.comppsych.2021.152227 
PMID: 33639332  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare no conflict of interest.


120. Nurs Open. 2021 Feb 26. doi: 10.1002/nop2.803. [Epub ahead of print]

Parental-couple separation during the transition to parenthood.

Gamgam Leanderz Å(1)(2), Hallgren J(1), Henricson M(3), Larsson M(1), Bäckström
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, University of Skövde, Skövde, Sweden.
(2)School of Health and Welfare, Jönköping University, Jönköping, Sweden.
(3)IMPROVE, Department of Nursing, School of Health and Welfare, Jönköping
University, Jönköping, Sweden.

AIM: To evaluate factors associated with parental separation during the
parenthood transition.
DESIGN: Prospective, longitudinal and explorative.
METHODS: This is a quantitative longitudinal study of N784 subjects throughout
the pregnancy journey with multivariate regression analysis of survey data
derived from three validated measurement scales; the Sense of Coherence scale,
the Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support and the Perceived Quality 
of the Dyadic Relationship scale conducted 2014-2016.
RESULTS: N17 participants separated at 2 years. Parental separation was
significantly greater for those women and partners with low or changing sense of 
coherence, perceived social support and perceived quality of the parental-couple 
relationship indexes. Partners with a change in sense of coherence (p: .003) and 
perceived quality of the parental-couple relationship (p: .020) between 1 week
and 2 years were at greater risk for separation. Attending professional
preparatory support with a partner for women (p: .013) and attending the
"Inspirational Lecture" for partners (p: .046) were, to a lesser extent,
associated with a risk of parental separation.

© 2021 The Authors. Nursing Open published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/nop2.803 
PMID: 33638297 


121. J Autism Dev Disord. 2021 Feb 26. doi: 10.1007/s10803-021-04929-6. [Epub ahead of
print]

Quality of Life Among Malaysian Parents with Autism Spectrum Disorder Child: The 
Double ABCX Model Approach.

Ismail MF(1), Safii R(2), Saimon R(2), Rahman MM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Medicine and Public Health, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Universiti Malaysia Sarawak (UNIMAS), 94300, Kota Samarahan,
Sarawak, Malaysia. chekbronze7@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Community Medicine and Public Health, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Universiti Malaysia Sarawak (UNIMAS), 94300, Kota Samarahan,
Sarawak, Malaysia.

This paper reported the quality of life (QoL) of 260 Malaysian parents with
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and factors which influencing it. About half of
these parents reported to having good QoL. The factors identified in the double
ABCX model showed that perceived social support and sense of coherence (SOC) were
mediated by coping strategies and had a positive direct and indirect effect on
parents' QoL. These finding reiterate the importance of social support, coping
skills, and strong SOC reflection skills in influencing the QoL of parents with
ASD child. We therefore suggest parents to utilize the widely available social
and organization supports to gain good QoL, which is also important for the
wellbeing of their child.

DOI: 10.1007/s10803-021-04929-6 
PMID: 33635421 


122. J Med Internet Res. 2021 Apr 2;23(4):e27121. doi: 10.2196/27121.

Computer Mouse Movements as an Indicator of Work Stress: Longitudinal
Observational Field Study.

Banholzer N(1), Feuerriegel S(1), Fleisch E(2)(3), Bauer GF(4), Kowatsch T(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Management, Technology and Economics, ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
(2)Centre for Digital Health Interventions, Department of Management, Technology 
and Economics, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Centre for Digital Health Interventions, Institute of Technology Management,
University of St. Gallen, Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Center for Salutogenesis, Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Prevention
Institute, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Work stress affects individual health and well-being. These negative 
effects could be mitigated through regular monitoring of employees' stress. Such 
monitoring becomes even more important as the digital transformation of the
economy implies profound changes in working conditions.
OBJECTIVE: The goal of this study was to investigate the association between
computer mouse movements and work stress in the field.
METHODS: We hypothesized that stress is associated with a speed-accuracy
trade-off in computer mouse movements. To test this hypothesis, we conducted a
longitudinal field study at a large business organization, where computer mouse
movements from regular work activities were monitored over 7 weeks; the study
included 70 subjects and 1829 observations. A Bayesian regression model was used 
to estimate whether self-reported acute work stress was associated with a
speed-accuracy trade-off in computer mouse movements.
RESULTS: There was a negative association between stress and the two-way
interaction term of mouse speed and accuracy (mean -0.32, 95% highest posterior
density interval -0.58 to -0.08), which means that stress was associated with a
speed-accuracy trade-off. The estimated association was not sensitive to
different processing of the data and remained negative after controlling for the 
demographics, health, and personality traits of subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Self-reported acute stress is associated with computer mouse
movements, specifically in the form of a speed-accuracy trade-off. This finding
suggests that the regular analysis of computer mouse movements could indicate
work stress.

©Nicolas Banholzer, Stefan Feuerriegel, Elgar Fleisch, Georg Friedrich Bauer,
Tobias Kowatsch. Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet Research
(http://www.jmir.org), 02.04.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/27121 
PMCID: PMC8052599
PMID: 33632675 


123. Int J Clin Pediatr Dent. 2020 Sep-Oct;13(5):493-496. doi:
10.5005/jp-journals-10005-1829.

A Cross-sectional Study on Sense of Coherence and Its Relationship with Caries
Experience and Socioeconomic Status in 11-16-year-old Schoolchildren.

Mrudhula KJ(1), Vinay C(1), Uloopi KS(1), RojaRamya KS(1), Chandrasekhar R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry, Vishnu Dental College,
Bhimavaram, Andhra Pradesh, India.

Aim: To know the association of sense of coherence (SOC), caries experience, and 
socioeconomic status (SES) in 11-16-year-old schoolchildren.
Materials and methods: This cross-sectional study included a total of 595
schoolchildren aged 11-16 years, and informed consent was obtained. Demographic
and socioeconomic data were collected through pro forma filled by the parents.
Sense of coherence of children was recorded with SOC-13 item questionnaire given 
in both English and local language (Telugu). Caries experience was recorded with 
DMFT index by carrying out the intra-oral examination of children.
Results: In a total of 595 schoolchildren, 35% children have weak SOC, 34.9% have
moderate SOC, and 29.9% have strong SOC. Caries experience was inversely
associated with SOC (p value = 0.006) on analysis by ANOVA. On multivariate
regression analysis, it was observed that for every one-unit increase in SOC,
caries experience decreased by 0.11 unit. However, there was statistically no
significant (p value = 0.09) relation between childhood SES and SOC. Age (p value
= 0.08) and gender (p value = 0.19) are not associated with SOC.
Conclusion: Sense of coherence influences the caries experience irrespective of
socioeconomic status, age, and gender of the child.
Clinical significance: Children having stronger SOC have increased likelihood to 
seek out preventive dental services, which helps in maintaining good oral health.
SOC is structured mainly by the experiences during the early years of life.
Therefore, SOC can be strengthened by interventions in the early life through
school dental health programs.
How to cite this article: Mrudhula KJN, Vinay C, Uloopi KS, et al. A
Cross-sectional Study on Sense of Coherence and Its Relationship with Caries
Experience and Socioeconomic Status in 11-16-year-old Schoolchildren. Int J Clin 
Pediatr Dent 2020;13(5):493-496.

Copyright © 2020; Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers (P) Ltd.

DOI: 10.5005/jp-journals-10005-1829 
PMCID: PMC7887174
PMID: 33623335 

Conflict of interest statement: Source of support: Nil Conflict of interest: None


124. Biochemistry. 2021 Mar 9;60(9):689-698. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00895. Epub
2021 Feb 23.

Repurposing Acitretin as an Antipseudomonal Agent Targeting the Pseudomonas
aeruginosa Iron-Regulated Heme Oxygenase.

Robinson EA(1), Wilks A(1), Xue F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Maryland School of
Pharmacy, 20 Penn Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, United States.

Iron is an essential micronutrient for the survival and virulence of the
bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. To overcome iron withholding and
successfully colonize a host, P. aeruginosa uses a variety of mechanisms to
acquire iron, including the secretion of high-affinity iron chelators
(siderophores) or the uptake and utilization of heme. P. aeruginosa heme
oxygenase (HemO) plays pivotal roles in heme sensing, uptake, and utilization and
has emerged as a therapeutic target for the development of antipseudomonal
agents. Using a high-throughput fluorescence quenching assay combined with
minimum inhibitory concentration measurements, we screened the Selleck Bioactive 
collection of 2100 compounds and identified acitretin, a Food and Drug
Administration-approved oral retinoid, as a potent and selective inhibitor of
HemO. Acitretin binds to HemO with a KD value of 0.10 ± 0.02 μM and inhibits the 
growth of P. aeruginosa PAO1 with an IC50 of 70 ± 18 μg/mL. In addition,
acitretin showed good selectivity for HemO, which uniquely generates BVIXβ/δ,
over human heme oxygenase (hHO1) and other BVIXα-producing homologues such as the
heme oxygenases from Neisseria meningitidis (nmHO) and Acinetobacter baumannii
(abHO). The binding of acitretin within the HemO active site was confirmed by
1H-15N heteronuclear single-quantum coherence nuclear magnetic resonance, and
molecular modeling provided further insight into potential interactions of
acitretin with residues specific for orienting heme in the β/δ selective HemO.
Moreover, at 20 μM, acitretin inhibited the enzymatic activity of HemO in P.
aeruginosa cells by >60% and effectively blocked the ability of P. aeruginosa to 
sense and acquire heme as demonstrated in the β-galactosidase transcriptional
reporter assay.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00895 
PMID: 33621054  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2021 Mar 1;209(3):218-227. doi: 10.1097/NMD.0000000000001283.

The Accuracy of Traumatic Memories in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Review.

Mattsson AM(1), Sonne C, Carlsson J.

Author information: 
(1)Competence Centre for Transcultural Psychiatry, Psychiatric Centre Ballerup,
the Mental Health Services of the Capital Region of Denmark, Ballerup; and
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

ABSTRACT: This review sought to investigate the accuracy of traumatic memories in
persons with a diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). PubMed,
PsycINFO, and Embase were searched for articles, and 11 studies were included.
Three different methods of studying memory accuracy were identified in the
included articles: coherence, change in recollection of trauma over time, and
remembering details of trauma. Three studies found a deficiency in the accuracy
of traumatic memory. Despite some inconsistencies, most of the studies concluded 
that the memory of trauma is as accurate in people with as in those without PTSD.
The only recurring difference identified across studies was in recollection of
trauma over time. The findings are of importance both clinically and for the
legal system.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/NMD.0000000000001283 
PMID: 33620914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Work. 2021;68(3):551-561. doi: 10.3233/WOR-203393.

Seizing and realizing the opportunity: A salutogenic perspective on
rehabilitation after burnout.

Pijpker R(1), Vaandrager L(1), Veen EJ(2), Koelen MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Health and Society, Department of Social Sciences, Wageningen University &
Research, The Netherlands.
(2)Rural Sociology, Department of Social Sciences, Wageningen University &
Research, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Most research on burnout has focused on its antecedents, correlates, 
and consequences. However, little empirical attention has been paid to what
constitutes successful rehabilitation after burnout, especially among young
employees.
OBJECTIVE: The present study empirically examined resources supporting successful
rehabilitation after burnout among young employees (between 18 and 35 years of
age) from a salutogenic perspective.
METHODS: Interpretative phenomenological analysis was used as a methodological
framework to explain the experiences of young employees underlying their
rehabilitation after burnout.
RESULTS: The analysis showed that the rehabilitation process comprises four
phases: 1) facing the crisis; 2) addressing the root causes; 3) seizing and
achieving the opportunity; and 4) staying at work. Essential overarching
resources facilitating successful recovery after burnout included receiving
social support from family, friends, and colleagues, as well as having a feeling 
of control over the rehabilitation process. Participants learned to be aware of
potential pitfalls that could trigger burnout symptoms, while having confidence
in their ability to prevent burnout from reoccurring. These continuous learning
processes were experienced as a prerequisite to remain at work.
CONCLUSIONS: Receiving social support and experiencing a feeling of control over 
the rehabilitation process appear to be key resources in facilitating a stable,
meaningful return to work after burnout.

DOI: 10.3233/WOR-203393 
PMCID: PMC8075387
PMID: 33612503  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Nurs Open. 2021 Jul;8(4):1731-1740. doi: 10.1002/nop2.814. Epub 2021 Feb 19.

Sense of coherence and coping strategies: How they influence quality of life in
Iranian women with breast cancer.

Zamanian H(1), Amini-Tehrani M(2)(3), Mahdavi Adeli A(4), Daryaafzoon M(5),
Arsalani M(5), Enzevaei A(6)(7), Farjami M(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health, Department of Health Promotion and Education, Qom University
of Medical Sciences, Qom, Iran.
(2)Department of Psychology, Faculty of Psychology and Education, University of
Tehran, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Health Psychology and Behavior Medicine Research Group, Students' Scientific
Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences (IUMS), Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Psychology, Saveh Branch, Islamic Azad University, Saveh, Iran.
(6)Infertility and Reproductive Health Research Center, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(7)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Arash Women's Hospital, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

AIM: To investigate the mediation/moderation effect between Coping Behaviors
(CBs) and Sense of Coherence (SOC) in the prediction of health-related quality of
life (HRQoL) in breast cancer patients.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional.
METHODS: A total of 221 patients were included in this study. The 13-item
Orientation to Life Questionnaire, Brief COPE and Functional Assessment of Cancer
Therapy-Breast were investigated. Pearson's correlation coefficient and
mediation/moderation analysis were performed.
RESULTS: Significant correlations were observed for SOC, active coping,
acceptance, positive reframing (PR), planning, use of emotional support (UES),
use of instrumental support, behaviour disengagement and self-blame with HRQoL.
Except for planning and acceptance, SOC partially mediated the CBs' effect on
HRQoL. The UES and PR's effects on HRQoL were significant at lower SOC levels and
diminished at higher SOC levels.
CONCLUSION: Practitioners can incorporate SOC and adaptive CBs, including PR and 
UES, into the rehabilitation programmes to improve HRQoL in patients.

© 2021 The Authors. Nursing Open published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/nop2.814 
PMCID: PMC8186695
PMID: 33608988  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2021 Feb 26;9(2):e25345. doi: 10.2196/25345.

Challenges for Nontechnical Implementation of Digital Proximity Tracing During
the COVID-19 Pandemic: Media Analysis of the SwissCovid App.

von Wyl V(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology, Biostatistics & Prevention Institute, University of Zurich,
Zürich, Switzerland.
(2)Institute for Implementation Science in Health Care, University of Zurich,
Zürich, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Several countries have released digital proximity tracing (DPT) apps 
to complement manual contact tracing for combatting the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. DPT 
aims to notify app users about proximity exposures to persons infected with
SARS-CoV-2 so that they can self-quarantine. The success of DPT apps depends on
user acceptance and the embedding of DPT into the pandemic mitigation strategy.
OBJECTIVE: By searching for media articles published during the first 3 months
after DPT launch, the implementation of DPT in Switzerland was evaluated to
inform similar undertakings in other countries. The second aim of the study was
to create a link between reported DPT implementation challenges and normalization
process theory for planning and optimizing complex digital health interventions, 
which can provide useful guidance for decision-making in DPT design and
implementation.
METHODS: A Swiss media database was searched for articles on the Swiss DPT app
(SwissCovid) published in German or French between July 4 and October 3, 2020. In
a structured process, topics were extracted and clustered manually from articles 
that were deemed pertinent. Extracted topics were mapped to four NPT constructs, 
which reflected the flow of intervention development from planning, stakeholder
onboarding, and execution to critical appraisal. Coherence constructs describe
sense-making by stakeholders, cognitive participation constructs reflect
participants' efforts to create engagement with the intervention, collective
actions refer to intervention execution and joint stakeholder efforts to make the
intervention work, and reflexive monitoring refers to collective risk-benefit
appraisals to create improvements.
RESULTS: Out of 94 articles deemed pertinent and selected for closer inspection, 
38 provided unique information on implementation challenges. Five challenge areas
were identified: communication challenges, challenges for DPT to interface with
other processes, fear of resource competition with established pandemic
mitigation measures, unclear DPT effectiveness, and obstacles to greater user
coverage and compliance. Specifically, several articles mentioned unclear DPT
benefits to affect commitment and to raise fears among different health system
actors regarding resource competition. Moreover, media reports indicated process 
interface challenges such as delays or unclear responsibilities in the
notification cascade, as well as misunderstandings and unmet communication needs 
from health system actors. Finally, reports suggested misaligned incentives, not 
only for app usage by the public but also for process engagement by other actors 
in the app notification cascade. NPT provided a well-fitting framework to
contextualize the different DPT implementation challenges and to highlight
improvement strategies, namely a better alignment of stakeholder incentives, or
stakeholder-specific communication to address their concerns about DPT.
CONCLUSIONS: Early experiences from one of the first adopters of DPT indicate
that nontechnical implementation challenges may affect the effectiveness of DPT. 
The NPT analysis provides a novel perspective on DPT implementation and stresses 
the need for stakeholder inclusion in development and operationalization.

©Viktor von Wyl. Originally published in JMIR mHealth and uHealth
(http://mhealth.jmir.org), 26.02.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/25345 
PMCID: PMC7919847
PMID: 33606658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Glob Health Promot. 2021 Jun;28(2):17-26. doi: 10.1177/1757975921992957. Epub
2021 Feb 18.

Individual, social and national coping resources and their relationships with
mental health and anxiety: A comparative study in Israel, Italy, Spain, and the
Netherlands during the Coronavirus pandemic.

Mana A(1), Super S(2), Sardu C(3), Juvinya Canal D(4), Moran N(5), Sagy S(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Behavioral Sciences, Peres Academic Center, Israel.
(2)Health and Society Group, Wageningen University, Netherlands.
(3)The Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health of the University of
Cagliari, Italy.
(4)Health Promotion Chair, Research Group Health and Healthcare, University of
Girona, Spain.
(5)The Department of Education, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva,
Israel.
(6)Martin Springer Center for Conflict Studies, Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.

Employing the salutogenic model, we asked how individuals in different countries 
cope with the COVID-19 crisis and stay healthy. We were interested in exploring
the individual (i.e. sense of coherence) as well as the social and national
resources (i.e. social support, sense of national coherence, and trust in
governmental institutions) that could explain levels of mental health and anxiety
during the outbreak of the pandemic. Data collection was conducted via
convenience sampling on online platforms, during the end of March and the
beginning of April 2020. The data included four samples: 640 Israeli participants
(319 males), 622 Dutch participants (177 males), 924 Italian participants (338
males) and 489 Spanish participants (117 males); age range of 18-88 years. The
questionnaires included standard tools (MHC-SF, GAD-7, SOC, SONC). Several
questions were adapted to the context of coronavirus and measured levels of
exposure to COVID-19, trust in governmental institutions, and social support. The
results significantly confirmed the suggested salutogenic model regarding the
contribution to individual and national coping resources to anxiety levels and
mental health. The patterns of the coping resources in explaining anxiety and
mental health were similar in the four samples, and SOC was the main predictor
these outcomes. Despite these similarities, a different pattern and also
different magnitudes of the predictive value of the coping resources were found
for the two different reactions: anxiety vs. mental health. While SOC and
situational factors (like financial threat) were significant in explaining
anxiety levels, the SOC and national resources were found as significant in
explaining mental health levels. The findings support the salutogenic approach in
studying reactions during pandemic time. They also shed some light on the
difference between pathogenic and salutogenic measures in studying psychological 
reactions to stressful situations.

DOI: 10.1177/1757975921992957 
PMCID: PMC7897541
PMID: 33601955 


130. BMC Geriatr. 2021 Feb 17;21(1):129. doi: 10.1186/s12877-021-02074-4.

Lifetime prevalence of polyvictimization among older adults in Sweden,
associations with ill-heath, and the mediating effect of sense of coherence.

Simmons J(1), Swahnberg K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Acute Internal Medicine and Geriatrics in Linköping, and
Department of Health, Medicine and Caring Sciences, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden. johanna.simmons@liu.se.
(2)Department of Health and Caring Sciences, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences,
Linnaeus University, Kalmar, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Experiences of violence and abuse is a prominent part of the life
history of many older adults and is known to have negative health effects.
However, the importance of multiple victimization over the life course, e.g.,
lifetime polyvictimization, is not well investigated in this age group. The
objective of this study was to investigate the prevalence of lifetime physical,
emotional, and sexual victimization as well as polyvictimization among older
adults in Sweden. We explored background characteristics associated with
polyvictimization and hypothesized that violence victimization and especially
polyvictimization would be associated with lower health status. To better
understand factors that promote health in the aftermath of victimization, we also
explored the effect of two resilience factors, sense of coherence (SOC) and
social support, on the association between victimization and ill-health.
METHOD: Cross-sectional data from a random population sample in Sweden (women
n = 270, men n = 337) aged 60-85 was used. Respondents answered questions about
exposure to violence, health status, social support, and SOC. Conditional process
analysis was used to test if SOC mediates the association between victimization
and health outcome, and if social support moderates the association.
RESULTS: Overall, 24.8% of the women and 27.6% of the men reported some form of
lifetime victimization and 82.1% of the female and 62.4% of the male victims were
classified as polyvictims, i.e., reported experiences of more than one episode of
violence. As hypothesized, we found a negative association between victimization 
and health status and the association was most prominent for polyvictims. We
found moderated mediation for the association between polyvictimization and
health status, i.e., polyvictimization was associated with lower SOC and SOC had 
a positive correlation with health status. Social support moderated the
association, i.e., victims without social support had lower health scores.
CONCLUSIONS: Lifetime polyvictimization was common among older adults and
associated with lower health status. To help victims of violence recover, or
preferably never develop ill-health, a better understanding of what fosters
resilience is warranted. This study implies that social support, and especially
SOC may be factors to consider in future interventions concerning older adults
subjected to violence.

DOI: 10.1186/s12877-021-02074-4 
PMCID: PMC7891035
PMID: 33596824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Acta Odontol Scand. 2021 Apr;79(3):218-231. doi: 10.1080/00016357.2020.1849790.
Epub 2021 Feb 17.

Salutogenic factors for oral health among older people: an integrative review
connecting the theoretical frameworks of Antonovsky and Lalonde.

Shmarina E(1)(2), Ericson D(3), Åkerman S(4), Axtelius B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Public Dental Service, Kalmar County Council, Oskarshamn, Sweden.
(2)Department of Oral Diagnostics, Faculty of Odontology, Malmö University,
Malmo, Sweden.
(3)Department of Cariology, Faculty of Odontology, Malmö University, Malmo,
Sweden.
(4)Department of Orofacial Pain and Jaw Function, Faculty of Odontology, Malmö
University, Malmo, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this integrative review was to describe salutogenic factors
associated with oral health outcomes in older people, from the theoretical
perspectives of Antonovsky and Lalonde.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This study was based on a primary selection of 10,016
articles. To organize reported salutogenic factors, the Lalonde health field
concept and Antonovsky's salutogenic theory were cross tabulated.
RESULTS: The final analysis was based on 58 studies. The following oral health
outcome variables were reported: remaining teeth, caries, periodontal disease,
oral function and oral health related quality of life (OHRQoL). We could identify
77 salutogenic factors for oral health and OHRQoL. Salutogenic factors were
identified primarily within the fields of Human Biology (such as 'higher saliva
flow', 'BMI < 30 kg/m2' and 'higher cognitive ability at age 11'), Lifestyle
(such as 'higher education level', 'social network diversity' and 'optimal oral
health behaviour') and Environment (such as 'lower income inequality', 'public
water fluoridation' and 'higher neighbourhood education level'). In the age group
60 years and over, there was a lack of studies with specific reference to
salutogenic factors.
CONCLUSIONS: The results provide an overview of salutogenic factors for oral
health from two theoretical perspectives. The method allowed concomitant
disclosure of both theoretical perspectives and examination of their congruence. 
Further hypothesis-driven research is needed to understand how elderly people can
best maintain good oral health.

DOI: 10.1080/00016357.2020.1849790 
PMID: 33596156  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Psychol Health. 2021 Feb 17:1-17. doi: 10.1080/08870446.2021.1879806. [Epub ahead
of print]

Development and psychometric testing of the self-regulatory questionnaire for
lung cancer screening (SRQ-LCS).

Quaife SL(1)(2), Brain KE(3), Stevens C(1), Kurtidu C(1), Janes SM(4), Waller
J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Department of Behavioural Science and Health, University College
London, London, UK.
(2)Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine, Queen Mary University of London,
London, UK.
(3)Division of Population Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(4)Lungs for Living Research Centre, UCL Respiratory, Division of Medicine,
University College London, London, UK.
(5)School of Cancer and Pharmaceutical Sciences, King's College London, London,
UK.

BACKGROUND: : Research implicates psychological factors in low uptake of lung
cancer screening. We developed and psychometrically tested a standardised measure
of these psychological determinants in preparation for a prospective,
longitudinal cohort study of screening uptake.
METHODS: : Leventhal's Common-Sense Model of Self-Regulation of Health and
Illness provided the theoretical framework to generate the initial item pool.
Items were refined during expert review and cognitive interviews which tested for
face validity, redundancy, acceptability and comprehensibility. An online survey 
piloted the refined pool with 1500 current and former (quit ≤ 15 years) smokers
aged 55-80. The response distributions, internal reliability and factor structure
determined the final retained constructs. Regression analyses examined these
constructs' associations with screening intention, smoking status and
demographics.
RESULTS: : The final measure included seven factor-derived subscales
(consequences, personal control, treatment control, illness coherence, emotional 
representation, behavioural response and appraisal, risk perception) with
Cronbach's alphas ranging from 0.59 to 0.91 and four single-item questions
(response efficacy for smoking cessation, treatment intention, perceived stigma
and lung cancer survival). Most constructs were associated with smoking status
and screening intention (p's < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: : The Self-Regulatory Questionnaire for Lung Cancer Screening
(SRQ-LCS) is an acceptable, reliable and valid measure for investigating the
psychological determinants of screening uptake.

DOI: 10.1080/08870446.2021.1879806 
PMID: 33593154 


133. J Psychosom Obstet Gynaecol. 2021 Feb 15:1-9. doi: 10.1080/0167482X.2021.1885026.
[Epub ahead of print]

The role of women's emotional profiles in birth outcome and birth experience.

Hildingsson I(1)(2), Rubertsson C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden.
(2)Department of Nursing, Mid Sweden University, Sundsvall, Sweden.
(3)Department of Health Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: The aim was to investigate birth outcome and birth experience in
relation to women's emotional health. An additional aim was to explore the
relationship between emotional health, continuity with a known midwife, and the
birth experience.
METHODS: A prospective longitudinal cohort study of 243 women enrolled in a
continuity of care project in a rural area in Sweden. Profiles were constructed
from instruments measuring depressive symptoms, worries, fear of birth, and sense
of coherence. Antenatal and birth records and questionnaires were used to collect
data.
RESULT: Women were categorized into two cluster profiles: "emotionally healthy"
vs. "emotionally unhealthy". Women in the "emotionally unhealthy" cluster had a
less positive birth experience (p = 0.006). The total score of the Childbirth
Experience Questionnaire was highest in women who had had a known midwife
assisting at birth. Babies born to women in the "emotionally unhealthy" cluster
were more likely to have a severe neonatal diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: There were few differences in birth outcome between the clusters,
while there were explicit differences in the childbirth experience. Having a
known midwife is important to warrant women a more positive childbirth
experience. Screening with validated instruments during antenatal care could be a
first step to further investigate women's emotional well-being and provide
targeted psychosocial support.

DOI: 10.1080/0167482X.2021.1885026 
PMID: 33586598 


134. Nutrients. 2021 Feb 10;13(2). pii: 585. doi: 10.3390/nu13020585.

Association between Depression, Lifestyles, Sleep Quality and Sense of Coherence 
in a Population with Cardiovascular Risk.

Riera-Sampol A(1)(2), Bennasar-Veny M(1)(2), Tauler P(2)(3), Nafría M(1), Colom
M(1), Aguilo A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group on Evidence, Lifestyles and Health, Department of Nursing and
Physiotherapy, Research Institute of Health Sciences (IUNICS), University of the 
Balearic Islands, 07122 Palma, Spain.
(2)Health Research Institute of the Balearic Islands (IdISBa), 07120 Palma,
Spain.
(3)Research Group on Evidence, Lifestyles and Health, Department of Fundamental
Biology and Health Sciences, Research Institute of Health Sciences (IUNICS),
University of the Balearic Islands, 07122 Palma, Spain.

People with cardiovascular risk have more depression than the general population.
Depression and cardiovascular risk have been commonly linked to lower sense of
coherence (SOC) values, unhealthy lifestyles, and poor sleep quality. The aim of 
this study was to analyze the association between depression, health-related
lifestyles, sleep quality, and SOC in a population with cardiovascular risk. A
cross-sectional study was conducted in 310 participants (aged 35-75 years) with
cardiovascular risk. Sociodemographic and anthropometric characteristics,
cardiovascular risk, SOC score, depression levels, sleep quality, and lifestyles 
(physical activity, diet quality (measured as the adherence to the Mediterranean 
diet), and tobacco and alcohol consumption) were determined. The regression
analysis showed significant associations between depression levels and sex (odds 
ratio (OR): 2.29; 95% CI: 1.29, 4.07), diet (OR: 0.85; 95% CI: 0.73, 0.99), body 
mass index (BMI) (OR: 1.06; 95% CI: 1.01, 1.12), cardiovascular disease (CVD)
(OR: 2.55; 95% CI: 1.18, 5.48), sleep quality (OR: 0.26; 95% CI: 0.15, 0.46), and
SOC (OR: 0.96; 95% CI: 0.94, 0.98). Protective effects of male sex, a lower BMI, 
no CVD, a higher adherence to the Mediterranean diet, a high sleep quality, and a
higher SOC were found. In conclusion, among lifestyles determined, only diet was 
associated with depression levels. SOC and sleep quality were also found as
significant predictors for depression levels.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13020585 
PMCID: PMC7916624
PMID: 33578822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.


135. J Psychol. 2021;155(3):292-308. doi: 10.1080/00223980.2021.1880360. Epub 2021 Feb
12.

Related Changes in Personal Recovery, Benefit Finding, and Sense of Coherence
among People with Chronic Mental Illness: A Two-Wave Study.

Chiba R(1), Yamazaki Y(2), Miyamoto Y(3), Funakoshi A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Kobe University.
(2)Nihon Fukushi University.
(3)The University of Tokyo.
(4)Kobe City College of Nursing.

Personal recovery is a process of developing new meaning and purpose in life
beyond the catastrophic effects of mental illness. Benefit finding (BF) is
conceptualized as finding positive changes or benefits through experiences in
adversity. Sense of coherence (SOC) focuses on how people can stay healthy and
maintain well-being, even in adversity. This study aimed to examine the
relationships among the initial levels and longitudinal changes in personal
recovery, BF, and SOC among people with chronic mental illness in Japan. In this 
longitudinal study, a two-wave self-report questionnaire survey was conducted for
service users aged 20 or older with mental illness using convenience sampling
method in 2014 and 2015. We applied the Latent Change Score approach. Model fit
was evaluated according to the CFI and RMSEA. Among 373 eligible participants at 
baseline, valid responses in both T1 and T2 from 195 respondents were included in
the study (valid response rate = 52.3%). Among them, 65.6% were male, with
average age of 45.6. The model of the three constructs at the two time points had
good to reasonable fit to the data. The initial levels and changes in personal
recovery, BF, and SOC were significantly and positively related to each other.

DOI: 10.1080/00223980.2021.1880360 
PMID: 33577744  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Glob Health Promot. 2021 Feb 11:1757975920987388. doi: 10.1177/1757975920987388. 
[Epub ahead of print]

El efecto mediador del sentido de coherencia en la relación entre autocuidado y
control glucémico de personas diabéticas.

Márquez-Palacios JH(1), Urzúa-Morales A(2), Calderón-Carvajal C(2),
Salazar-Estrada JG(3), Díaz-Reséndiz FJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Humanidades, Universidad Iberoamericana Torreón, Torreón,
Coahuila, México.
(2)Escuela de Psicología, Universidad Católica del Norte, Antofagasta, Chile.
(3)Centro Universitario de los Valles, Universidad de Guadalajara, Ameca,
Jalisco, México.
(4)Laboratorio de Análisis Conductual, Centro Universitario del Sur, Universidad 
de Guadalajara, Ciudad Guzmán, Jalisco, México.

Mantener un adecuado control de la diabetes se relaciona con variables como
autocuidado y sentido de coherencia que reducen las tasas de morbilidad y
mortalidad. El objetivo fue evaluar el efecto mediador del sentido de coherencia 
en la relación entre autocuidado y niveles de glucosa en sangre de personas con
diabetes. A 220 sujetos con diabetes mellitus tipo 2 se les aplicó un instrumento
para autocuidado y otro para sentido de coherencia, mientras que la hemoglobina
glucosilada se obtuvo del expediente médico, posteriormente se analizaron los
datos por medio de un modelo de ecuaciones estructurales. Los resultados muestran
que el tanto el autocuidado (c' = -0.33; p < 0.05), como el sentido de coherencia
(b = -0.34; p < 0.05) tienen un efecto directo sobre los niveles de glucosa, así 
como también un efecto indirecto significativo (-0.168; p < 0.05). El efecto
total de AC sobre A1c corresponden a -0.498. En consecuencia, este modelo
estimado corresponde a un modelo de mediación simple parcial. Los resultados
confirman la hipótesis de que el sentido de coherencia en personas con diabetes
media la relación entre AC y HbA1c. El enfoque salutogénico mejora la adherencia 
a las conductas de autocuidado, lo que puede facilitar el control glucémico de la
enfermedad.

DOI: 10.1177/1757975920987388 
PMID: 33573454 


137. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Feb 9;18(4). pii: 1668. doi:
10.3390/ijerph18041668.

Sense of Coherence and Quality of Life in Patients Treated with Antivitamin K
Oral Anticoagulants: A Cross-Sectional Study.

Anguas-Gracia A(1)(2)(3), Subirón-Valera AB(1)(3)(4), Rodríguez-Roca B(1),
Gasch-Gallén Á(1)(5), Antón-Solanas I(1)(5), Urcola-Pardo F(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiatry and Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Zaragoza, C/Domingo Miral s/n, 50009 Zaragoza, Spain.
(2)Research Group Safety and Care (GIISA0021), Institute of Research of Aragón,
50009 Zaragoza, Spain.
(3)Research Group Water and Environmental Health (B43_20R), University Institute 
of Research in Environmental Science of Aragón, University of Zaragoza, 50009
Zaragoza, Spain.
(4)Research Group Sector III Healthcare (GIIS081), Institute of Research of
Aragón, 50009 Zaragoza, Spain.
(5)Research Group Nursing Research in Primary Care in Aragón (GENIAPA) (GIIS094),
Institute of Research of Aragón, 50009 Zaragoza, Spain.

The aim of this study was to analyze the correlation between the participants'
self-reported quality of life and their sense of coherence in a sample (n = 85)
of patients on treatment with oral antivitamin K anticoagulants. A
cross-sectional design was used. The measurement instruments included a
questionnaire on sociodemographic variables, the Spanish version of the
Abbreviated World Health Organization Quality of Life questionnaire
(WHOQOL-BREF), an oral-anticoagulant-treatment-specific quality-of-life
questionnaire, and the sense-of-coherence (SOC) scale. We analyzed the
correlations between the participants' characteristics and the results from the
quality-of-life and SOC scales. Age, level of education, employment status,
living arrangement, and treatment length were the determinants of the quality of 
life in people treated with oral anticoagulants. We found a significant
association between the four domains of the WHOQOL-BREF questionnaire and general
treatment satisfaction (p < 0.01); no significant correlations were found between
the SOC subscales and the oral-anticoagulant-treatment-specific quality of life
in our sample. Women had a worse level of self-management than men. Nursing
interventions should be tailored to the needs of the populations on treatment
with oral anticoagulants in order to facilitate a higher level of
self-management.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18041668 
PMCID: PMC7916212
PMID: 33572412  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


138. Implement Sci Commun. 2021 Feb 10;2(1):16. doi: 10.1186/s43058-021-00120-1.

The views of New Zealand general practitioners and patients on a proposed risk
assessment and communication tool: a qualitative study using Normalisation
Process Theory.

Leitch S(1), Smith A(2), Crengle S(3), Stokes T(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Otago Medical School, Dunedin, New Zealand.
sharon.leitch@otago.ac.nz.
(2)School of Pharmacy, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(3)University of Otago Medical School, Dunedin, New Zealand.

BACKGROUND: Communicating risks of medication harm and obtaining informed consent
is difficult due to structural barriers, language and cultural practices, bias
and a lack of resources appropriately tailored for the health literacy of most
patients. A decision support tool was proposed to alert prescribers of risk and
provide tailored information for patients to facilitate informed decision-making 
with patients and their whānau (family) around medication use. Patient and
prescriber co-design was used to ensure the tool was designed to best meet the
needs of end-users and avoid increasing health inequity. This paper describes the
first stage of the co-design process.
METHOD: Normalisation Process Theory (NPT) was used to prospectively evaluate the
tool. Semi-structured interviews were held with fifteen patients (five Māori,
five Pasifika and five NZ European) and nine general practitioners (two Māori and
seven European).
RESULTS: Three themes were identified, which related to the three NPT concepts
most relevant to developing the tool. Theme 1 (coherence: meaning and sense
making by participants) explored participants' understanding of prescribing
safety, medication harm and risk, which is based on experience. Patients want as 
much information as possible about their medications and risk, but doctors find
it difficult to communicate that information. Theme 2 related to the NPT concept 
of cognitive participation (commitment and engagement by participants) explored
what participants thought about a prescribing decision support tool. Participants
were cautiously optimistic, but worried about potential harm arising from its
use. They also identified requirements for the tool and features to avoid. Theme 
3 describes the collective action required for successful implementation of the
tool; namely, culturally safe and trustworthy doctor-patient relationships.
CONCLUSION: Patients and general practitioners provided different perspectives
when prospectively evaluating the proposed risk assessment and communication
tool. This co-design research identified important pre-requisites for the tool
and features to avoid and novel ideas for the proposed tool. Overall participants
supported the development of the proposed risk assessment and communication tool,
but identified the important role that doctor-patient relationships would play to
ensure successful implementation. The use of Māori and Pacific languages in the
proposed tool may enhance engagement and understanding.

DOI: 10.1186/s43058-021-00120-1 
PMCID: PMC7877107
PMID: 33568225 


139. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2021 Feb 10;19(1):53. doi: 10.1186/s12955-021-01696-x.

Phenotypes of adults with congenital heart disease around the globe: a cluster
analysis.

Callus E(1)(2), Pagliuca S(1), Boveri S(3), Ambrogi F(4), Luyckx K(5)(6), Kovacs 
AH(7)(8), Apers S(9), Budts W(10)(11), Enomoto J(12), Sluman MA(13)(14), Wang
JK(15), Jackson JL(16), Khairy P(17), Cook SC(18), Chidambarathanu S(19), Alday
L(20), Eriksen K(21), Dellborg M(22)(23)(24), Berghammer M(24)(25)(26), Johansson
B(27), Mackie AS(28), Menahem S(29), Caruana M(30), Veldtman G(31), Soufi A(32), 
Fernandes SM(33), White K(34), Kutty S(35)(36), Moons P(37)(38)(39)(40);
APPROACH-IS consortium and the International Society for Adult Congenital Heart
Disease (ISACHD).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Psychology Service, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Milan, Italy.
(3)Scientific Directorate, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan,
Milan, Italy.
(5)KU Leuven School Psychology and Development in Context, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.
(6)UNIBS, University of the Free State, Bloemfontein, South Africa.
(7)Peter Munk Cardiac Centre, University Health Network, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada.
(8)Knight Cardiovascular Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland,
OR, USA.
(9)KU Leuven Department of Public Health and Primary Care, KU Leuven,
Kapucijnenvoer 35, Box 7001, 3000, Leuven, Belgium.
(10)Division of Congenital and Structural Cardiology, University Hospitals
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(11)KU Leuven Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(12)Department of Education, Toyo University, Tokyo, Japan.
(13)Coronel Institute of Occupational Health, Amsterdam UMC, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(14)Department of Cardiology, Jeroen Bosch Hospital, 's Hertogenbosch, The
Netherlands.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(16)Center for Biobehavioral Health, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus,
OH, USA.
(17)Adult Congenital Heart Center, Montreal Heart Institute, Université de
Montréal, Montreal, Canada.
(18)Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center, Helen DeVos Children's Hospital, Grand
Rapids, MI, USA.
(19)Pediatric Cardiology, Frontier Lifeline Hospital (Dr. K. M. Cherian Heart
Foundation), Chennai, India.
(20)Division of Cardiology, Hospital de Niños, Córdoba, Argentina.
(21)Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center, Oslo University Hospital -
Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway.
(22)Adult Congenital Heart Unit, Sahlgrenska University Hospital/Östra,
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(23)Institute of Medicine, The Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(24)Centre for Person-Centred Care (GPCC), University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, 
Sweden.
(25)Department of Health Sciences, University West, Trollhättan, Sweden.
(26)Department of Paediatrics, Queen Silvia Children's Hospital, Sahlgrenska
University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(27)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå University, Umeå,
Sweden.
(28)Division of Cardiology, Stollery Children's Hospital, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Canada.
(29)Monash Heart, Monash Medical Centre, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
(30)Department of Cardiology, Mater Dei Hospital, Birkirkara Bypass, Malta.
(31)Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(32)Department of Congenital Heart Disease, Louis Pradel Hospital, Hospices
civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(33)Adult Congenital HeartProgram at Stanford, Lucile Packard Children's Hospital
Stanford and Stanford Health Care, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(34)Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center, Washington University and Barnes
Jewish Heart & Vascular Center, University of Missouri, Saint Louis, MO, USA.
(35)Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center University of Nebraska Medical Center/ 
Children's Hospital and Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(36)Taussig Heart Center, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, USA.
(37)KU Leuven Department of Public Health and Primary Care, KU Leuven,
Kapucijnenvoer 35, Box 7001, 3000, Leuven, Belgium. philip.moons@kuleuven.be.
(38)Centre for Person-Centred Care (GPCC), University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, 
Sweden. philip.moons@kuleuven.be.
(39)Institute of Health and Care Sciences, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, 
Sweden. philip.moons@kuleuven.be.
(40)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Cape Town, Cape
Town, South Africa. philip.moons@kuleuven.be.

OBJECTIVE: To derive cluster analysis-based groupings for adults with congenital 
heart disease (ACHD) when it comes to perceived health, psychological
functioning, health behaviours and quality of life (QoL).
METHODS: This study was part of a larger worldwide multicentre study called
APPROACH-IS; a cross sectional study which recruited 4028 patients (2013-2015)
from 15 participating countries. A hierarchical cluster analysis was performed
using Ward's method in order to group patients with similar psychological
characteristics, which were defined by taking into consideration the scores of
the following tests: Sense Of Coherence, Health Behavior Scale (physical exercise
score), Hospital Anxiety Depression Scale, Illness Perception Questionnaire,
Satisfaction with Life Scale and the Visual Analogue Scale scores of the EQ-5D
perceived health scale and a linear analogue scale (0-100) measuring QoL.
RESULTS: 3768 patients with complete data were divided into 3 clusters. The first
and second clusters represented 89.6% of patients in the analysis who reported a 
good health perception, QoL, psychological functioning and the greatest amount of
exercise. Patients in the third cluster reported substantially lower scores in
all PROs. This cluster was characterised by a significantly higher proportion of 
females, a higher average age the lowest education level, more complex forms of
congenital heart disease and more medical comorbidities.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that certain demographic and clinical
characteristics may be linked to less favourable health perception, quality of
life, psychological functioning, and health behaviours in ACHD. This information 
may be used to improve psychosocial screening and the timely provision of
psychosocial care.

DOI: 10.1186/s12955-021-01696-x 
PMCID: PMC7877115
PMID: 33568120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2021 Feb 9;21(1):47. doi: 10.1186/s12911-021-01415-y.

Making sense of DialysisConnect: a qualitative analysis of stakeholder viewpoints
on a web-based information exchange platform to improve care transitions between 
dialysis clinics and hospitals.

Vandenberg AE(1), Jaar BG(2), James KP(3), Lea J(3), O'Donnell C(3), Masud T(3), 
Mutell R(4), Plantinga LC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA. avanden@emory.edu.
(2)Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(4)Apex Health Innovations, Williamsburg, VA, USA.

BACKGROUND: U.S. hospitals and dialysis centers are penalized for 30-day hospital
readmissions of dialysis patients, despite little infrastructure to facilitate
care transitions between these settings. We are developing a third-party
web-based information exchange platform, DialysisConnect, to enable clinicians to
view and exchange information about dialysis patients during admission,
hospitalization, and discharge. This health information technology solution could
serve as a flexible and relatively affordable solution for dialysis facilities
and hospitals across the nation who are seeking to serve as true partners in the 
improved care of dialysis patients. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the
perceived coherence of DialysisConnect to key clinical stakeholders, to prepare
messaging for implementation.
METHODS: As part of a hybrid effectiveness-implementation study guided by
Normalization Process Theory, we collected data on stakeholder perceptions of
continuity of care for patients receiving maintenance dialysis and a
DialysisConnect prototype before completing development and piloting the system. 
We conducted four focus groups with stakeholders from one academic hospital and
associated dialysis centers [hospitalists (n = 5), hospital staff (social
workers, nurses, pharmacists; n = 9), nephrologists (n = 7), and dialysis clinic 
staff (social workers, nurses; n = 10)]. Transcriptions were analyzed
thematically within each component of the construct of coherence
(differentiation, communal specification, individual specification, and
internalization).
RESULTS: Participants differentiated DialysisConnect from usual care variously as
an information dashboard, a quick-exchange communication channel, and improved
discharge information delivery; some could not differentiate it in terms of
workflow. The purpose of DialysisConnect (communal specification) was viewed as
fully coherent only for communicating outside of the same healthcare system.
Current system workarounds were acknowledged as deterrents for practice change.
All groups delegated DialysisConnect tasks (individual specification) to
personnel besides themselves. Partial internalization of DialysisConnect was
achieved only by dialysis clinic staff, based on experience with similar
technology.
CONCLUSIONS: Implementing DialysisConnect for clinical users in both settings
will require presenting a composite picture of current communication processes
from all stakeholder groups to correct single-group misunderstandings, as well as
providing data about care transitions communication beyond the local context to
ease resistance to practice change.

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-021-01415-y 
PMCID: PMC7871569
PMID: 33563290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Nord J Psychiatry. 2021 Feb 9:1-4. doi: 10.1080/08039488.2021.1877814. [Epub
ahead of print]

Sense of coherence in long-term follow-up of adolescents with anorexia nervosa.

Vagedes J(1)(2), Kleih T(2)(3)(4), Belizer C(2)(5), Svaldi J(5), Hautzinger M(5),
von Schoen-Angerer T(2)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)ARCIM Institute, Filderklinik, Filderstadt, Germany.
(3)Institute of Medical Psychology, Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Institute of Psychology, Humboldt University of Berlin, Germany.
(5)Department of Clinical Psychology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Fribourg Cantonal Hospital HFR, Fribourg,
Switzerland.
(7)Department of Community Health, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Sense of coherence (SOC) is a personal resource that allows people to
stay healthy in spite of stressful situations. SOC is known to be low in eating
disorders. We explored whether SOC correlated with anorexia nervosa (AN) symptoms
several years after initial hospitalization for AN, to inform us whether AN
treatment concepts could more specifically focus on increasing SOC.
METHODS: Former patients were contacted 5-11 years after hospitalization for AN
in a German integrative medicine hospital. Participants completed the Eating
Disorder Inventory (EDI-2) and the SOC Questionnaire (SOC-13). Hospital records
were reviewed. Correlations between EDI-2 subscales and SOC-13 were tested. A
t-test was conducted to assess the difference between the SOC-13 and the norm. A 
median split was performed, dividing SOC scores into two groups and comparing
these with EDI-2 subscales.
RESULTS: Of 149 previously hospitalized female patients, 83 could be contacted
and 68 agreed to participate (46%). 17.6% self-reported that they currently
suffered from an eating disorder. The mean follow-up time was 7.2 years. All
EDI-2 subscales correlated negatively with the SOC-13 score (p < .01). The mean
SOC was significantly lower than the norm (p < .001). In the median split, the
lower SOC group had significantly higher scores on all EDI-2 subscales.
CONCLUSIONS: Amongst previously hospitalized AN patients, the SOC was lower than 
a normative sample and correlated with on-going eating disorder symptoms in
long-term follow-up. Strengthening SOC as a personal resource should be
incorporated as a specific goal in AN treatment and its impact on long-term
outcomes evaluated.

DOI: 10.1080/08039488.2021.1877814 
PMID: 33559511 


142. Work. 2021;68(2):519. doi: 10.3233/WOR-203390.

Evaluation of mood, stress levels and sense of coherence in future
physiotherapists.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Work. 2020;67(4):939-947.

DOI: 10.3233/WOR-203390 
PMID: 33554933 


143. Eur J Midwifery. 2020 Jul 30;4:30. doi: 10.18332/ejm/124110. eCollection 2020.

Models for midwifery care: A mapping review.

Eri TS(1), Berg M(2)(3), Dahl B(4), Gottfreðsdóttir H(5)(6), Sommerseth E(4),
Prinds C(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Oslo Metropolitan University, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Sahlgrenska Academy, Institute of Health and Care Sciences, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)The Obstretic Unit, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Centre for Women's, Family and Child Health, Faculty of Health and Social
Sciences, University of South-Eastern Norway, Kongsberg, Norway.
(5)Department of Midwifery, Faculty of Nursing, University of Iceland, Reykjavík,
Iceland.
(6)Women´s Clinic, Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavík, Iceland.
(7)Institute of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense C,
Denmark.
(8)Department of Research, University College South Denmark, Haderslev, Denmark.

INTRODUCTION: According to WHO, midwives are found competent to provide
evidencebased and normalcy-facilitating maternity care. Models for midwifery care
exist, but seem to be lacking explicit epistemological status, mainly focusing on
the practical and organizational level of care delivery. To make the values and
attitudes of care visible, it is important to implement care models with explicit
epistemological status. The aim of this paper is to identify and gain an overview
of publications of theoretical models for midwifery care.
METHODS: A mapping review was conducted with systematic searches in nine
databases for studies describing a theoretical model or theory for midwifery care
that either did or was intended to impact clinical practice. Eligibility criteria
were refined during the selection process.
RESULTS: Six models from six papers originating from different parts of the world
were included in the study. The included models were developed using different
methodologies and had different philosophical underpinnings and complexity
gradients. Some characteristics were common, the most distinctive being the
emphasis of the midwife-woman relationship, secondly the focus on
woman-centeredness, and thirdly the salutogenic focus in care.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, scarcity exists regarding theoretical models for midwifery 
care with explicit epistemological status. Further research is needed in order to
develop generic theoretical models with an epistemological status to serve as a
knowledge base for midwifery healthcare.

© 2020 Eri T. S. et al.

DOI: 10.18332/ejm/124110 
PMCID: PMC7839165
PMID: 33537631 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have completed and submitted the
ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest and none was
reported.


144. BMC Public Health. 2021 Feb 2;21(1):262. doi: 10.1186/s12889-021-10284-z.

Promoting mental health in migrants: a GHQ12-evaluation of a community health
program in Sweden.

Wrede O(1), Löve J(2), Jonasson JM(2), Panneh M(2), Priebe G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Crisis and Trauma Unit, Region Västra Götaland, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)School of Public Health and Community Medicine, Institute of Medicine,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)School of Public Health and Community Medicine, Institute of Medicine,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
gunilla.priebe@gu.se.

BACKGROUND: Research increasingly highlight post-migration factors for migrants' 
mental health status. We investigated the association between participation in a 
health promotion program and changes in migrants' mental health, and if
socio-demographic factors and length of time in the new home country, Sweden,
influenced a potential association.
METHODS: A five-week health promotion program named 'Hälsostöd' [Health Support],
led by community health workers, was offered to migrants, primarily asylum
seekers and newly arrived immigrants (N = 202). The framework for the program was
salutogenic psycho-education, which focused on health effects of migration
experiences, lifestyle and health, and the health care system. Mental health was 
measured at the start and end of the program. We analysed this follow up by using
the recommended clinical cut off (i.e. > 11 of maximum 36, with higher scores
indicating possible mental illness) in the 12- item version of the General Health
Questionnaire (GHQ12). Chi Square test was used to analyse statistical
significance of changes, and multinomial logistic regression to analyse
associations to sociodemographic factors and length of stay in Sweden.
RESULTS: The number of participants scoring above the clinical cut off after
participation in the program (N = 79, 39.1%) was lower compared to the
corresponding number before participation (N = 111, 55.0%), Chi Square = 10.17,
p < .001. The majority of the participants had no change 72.3 (N = 146), 21.8%
(N = 44) had a positive change, yet 5.9% (N = 12) had a negative change, compared
to before participation in the program. None of the investigated sociodemographic
factors showed to significantly influence the association. Length of stay in
Sweden was trending, with participants with longer stay being more likely to have
possible mental illness.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that psycho-educative programs, similar to 'Hälsostöd',
have potential for promoting asylum seekers' and newly arrived immigrants' mental
health as the evaluation showed a considerable number of positive changes in
participants. The result suggests the importance of offering immigrants health
promotive programs in close connection with arrival to the new home country.
Future research should clarify under what circumstances sociodemographic factors 
influence the effects of such programs.

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-021-10284-z 
PMCID: PMC7851926
PMID: 33530971  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Bundesgesundheitsblatt Gesundheitsforschung Gesundheitsschutz. 2021
Mar;64(3):334-341. doi: 10.1007/s00103-021-03281-5. Epub 2021 Feb 2.

[Health-related consequences of social isolation: a qualitative study on
psychosocial stress and resources among older adults in the COVID-19 pandemic].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Welzel FD(1), Schladitz K(2), Förster F(2), Löbner M(2), Riedel-Heller SG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Sozialmedizin, Arbeitsmedizin und Public Health (ISAP),
Medizinische Fakultät, Universität Leipzig, Philipp-Rosenthal-Straße 55, 04103,
Leipzig, Deutschland. Franziska.Welzel@medizin.uni-leipzig.de.
(2)Institut für Sozialmedizin, Arbeitsmedizin und Public Health (ISAP),
Medizinische Fakultät, Universität Leipzig, Philipp-Rosenthal-Straße 55, 04103,
Leipzig, Deutschland.

BACKGROUND: The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic led to a general uncertainty about risk and
consequences of the disease. Older adults are specifically vulnerable with regard
to severe courses of the disease and have been particularly encouraged to
self-isolate during the pandemic. Subsequently, expressions of concern have been 
raised regarding the negative impact of disease risk and quarantine on the mental
health of older people.
OBJECTIVES: Assessment of psychosocial stress, coping strategies, need for
support, and sense of coherence of older people during the COVID-19 pandemic.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study follows a qualitative research design. Between
May and June 2020 N = 11 guided telephone interviews were conducted with older
adults (70+ years). Telephone interviews were recorded by audio tape and fully
transcribed. A qualitative content analysis was performed according to Mayring
and Fenzl (2019) using MAXQDA.
RESULTS: Participants were 74.8 years old on average. Participants showed
predominantly good psychosocial health and functional coping strategies. Life
experience, an optimistic attitude, understanding of the necessity of
restrictions, and previous crises that have been mastered were the most important
resources during the COVID-19 pandemic for older adults. Offers of support were
rarely used. Participants were critical of the closing of centers or meeting
points for older people.
CONCLUSION: Older adults appear to be able to preserve their mental wellbeing
during the COVID-19 pandemic. The relevance of mental resources of older adults
for supporting younger generations seems to be unrecognized.

Publisher: HINTERGRUND: Mit dem SARS-CoV-2-Ausbruchsgeschehen („Severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus type 2“, COVID-19) ist es zu einer
Verunsicherung über Erkrankungsrisiko und Folgen der Virusinfektion in der
Bevölkerung gekommen. Ältere Menschen gelten als Risikogruppe für schwere
Infektionsverläufe und wurden im besonderen Maße zu sozialer Distanzierung
aufgerufen. Gleichzeitig wurde die Sorge geäußert, dass sich Erkrankungsrisiko
und soziale Isolation negativ auf die psychische Gesundheit älterer Menschen
auswirken würden.Erfassung von psychosozialen Belastungen, vorhandenen
Bewältigungsstrategien, Unterstützungsbedarfen und Kohärenzerleben älterer
Menschen im Zusammenhang mit dem COVID-19-Ausbruchsgeschehen.Die Studie folgt
einem qualitativen Untersuchungsdesign. Zwischen Mai und Juni 2020 wurden
telefonische Interviews mit 11 älteren Personen (70+) durchgeführt. Die
Durchführung der Interviews erfolgte leitfadengestützt. Die Daten wurden mittels 
Audioaufzeichnung festgehalten, transkribiert und inhaltsanalytisch nach Mayring 
und Fenzl (2019) unter Nutzung von MAXQDA ausgewertet.Die Probanden waren im
Durchschnitt 74,8 Jahre alt. Bei den Befragten zeigte sich ein überwiegend
stabiles Befinden und gutes Zurechtkommen mit dem COVID-19-Geschehen. Als
wesentliche Ressourcen wurden Lebenserfahrung, frühere bewältigte Krisen, eine
optimistische Grundhaltung und Einsicht in die Notwendigkeit der Maßnahmen
genannt. Externe Unterstützungsangebote seien kaum in Anspruch genommen worden.
Das Schließen seniorenspezifischer Treffpunkte wurde kritisch bewertet.Ältere
Menschen scheinen sich ihre psychosoziale Gesundheit trotz COVID-19-Pandemie
überwiegend zu erhalten. Die Bedeutsamkeit mentaler Ressourcen älterer Menschen
für die Unterstützung jüngerer Generationen bleibt bisher unerkannt.
DOI: 10.1007/s00103-021-03281-5 
PMCID: PMC7852481
PMID: 33528612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Neuropsychol. 2021 Mar;15(1):1-19. doi: 10.1111/jnp.12234. Epub 2021 Feb 1.

Singularity and consciousness: A neuropsychological contribution.

de Haan EHF(1)(2), Scholte HS(1)(2), Pinto Y(1)(2), Foschi N(3), Polonara G(4),
Fabri M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Amsterdam Brain & Cognition (ABC) Center, University of Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.
(3)Epilepsy Center-Neurological Clinic, Azienda "Ospedali Riuniti", Ancona,
Italy.
(4)Department of Odontostomatologic and Specialized Clinical Sciences, Marche
Polytechnic University, Ancona, Italy.
(5)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Marche Polytechnic
University, Ancona, Italy.

In common sense experience based on introspection, consciousness is singular.
There is only one 'me' and that is the one that is conscious. This means that
'singularity' is a defining aspect of 'consciousness'. However, the three main
theories of consciousness, Integrated Information, Global Workspace and Recurrent
Processing theory, are generally not very clear on this issue. These theories
have traditionally relied heavily on neuropsychological observations and have
interpreted various disorders, such as anosognosia, neglect and split-brain as
impairments in conscious awareness without any reference to 'the singularity'. In
this review, we will re-examine the theoretical implications of these impairments
in conscious awareness and propose a new way how to conceptualize consciousness
of singularity. We will argue that the subjective feeling of singularity can
coexist with several disunified conscious experiences. Singularity awareness may 
only come into existence due to environmental response constraints. That is,
perceptual, language, memory, attentional and motor processes may largely proceed
unintegrated in parallel, whereas a sense of unity only arises when organisms
need to respond coherently constrained by the affordances of the environment.
Next, we examine from this perspective psychiatric disorders and psycho-active
drugs. Finally, we present a first attempt to test this hypothesis with a resting
state imaging experiment in a split-brain patient. The results suggest that there
is substantial coherence of activation across the two hemispheres. These data
show that a complete lesioning of the corpus callosum does not, in general, alter
the resting state networks of the brain. Thus, we propose that we have separate
systems in the brain that generate distributed conscious. The sense of
singularity, the experience of a 'Me-ness', emerges in the interaction between
the world and response-planning systems, and this leads to coherent activation in
the different functional networks across the cortex.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Neuropsychology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
on behalf of British Psychological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/jnp.12234 
PMCID: PMC8048575
PMID: 33522716 


147. Scand J Caring Sci. 2021 Feb 1. doi: 10.1111/scs.12959. [Epub ahead of print]

Self-transcendence among adults 65 years and older: A meta-analysis.

Haugan G(1)(2), Deliktaş Demirci A(3), Kabukcuoglu K(3), Aune I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Nursing, NTNU Norwegian University of
Technology and Science, Trondheim, Norway.
(2)Faculty of Nursing and Health Sciences, Nord University, Levanger, Norway.
(3)Faculty of Nursing, Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey.
(4)NTNU Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Trondheim, Norway.

INTRODUCTION: Self-transcendence is a human capacity for wellbeing by expanding
one's personal boundaries and may act as a health-promoting resource among adults
≥65 years. Therefore, the objectives of this meta-analysis were to determine the 
mean score of self-transcendence based on place of residence and gender, and to
evaluate the correlations of self-transcendence with meaning, sense of coherence,
resilience and depression.
METHODS: Based on inclusion criteria, 13 studies were included. Orwin Safe N and 
Egger's test assessed publication bias. The mean score of self-transcendence and 
the correlation coefficients of the selected variables were estimated by random
effects models.
RESULTS: The self-transcendence mean score (n = 1634) was low (M = 43.6) and a
bit lower among those staying in care facilities (M = 42.8), but did not vary
significantly across gender. The correlation coefficients were
self-transcendence_depression (r = -0.40), self-transcendence_meaning-in-life
(r = 0.53), self-transcendence_resilience (r = 0.50) and self-transcendence_sense
of coherence (r = 0.28). The correlation coefficients, except for
meaning-in-life, were homogeneous.
CONCLUSION: In a health-promoting perspective, the concept of self-transcendence 
can help to better understand wellbeing among older individuals and provide
guidance for health professionals in facilitating wellbeing and health. The
concept and theory of self-transcendence can inspire health professionals in
realising new health-promoting approaches to support older individuals in
maintaining health, wellbeing and independency.

© 2021 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Caring Sciences published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Nordic College of Caring Science.

DOI: 10.1111/scs.12959 
PMID: 33522632 


148. Front Psychol. 2021 Jan 15;11:620011. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.620011. eCollection
2020.

Collective Self-Esteem and School Segregation in Chilean Secondary Students.

Cuadros O(1), Leal-Soto F(1)(2), Rubio A(3)(4), Sánchez B(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación para la Educación Inclusiva, Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Valparaíso, Viña del Mar, Chile.
(2)Departamento de Ciencias Sociales, Universidad de Tarapacá, Iquique, Chile.
(3)Facultad de Economía y Negocios, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile.
(4)Facultad de Psicología, Universidad Diego Portales, Santiago, Chile.
(5)Facultad de Educación y Ciencias Sociales, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago,
Chile.

Chile has established hybrid policies for the administrative distribution of its 
educational establishments, leading to significant gaps in educational results
and school conditions between public, mixed, and private schools. As a result,
there are high levels of segregation, and social and economic vulnerability that 
put public schools at a disadvantage, affecting their image and causing a
constant decrease in enrollment. An abbreviated version of Luhtanen and Crocker's
(1992) collective self-esteem scale was adapted and validated for the Chilean
educational context because of its usefulness in studying processes of social
segregation and cultural coherence, seeking to identify student perception about 
the appreciation of school actions in the context of belonging and identification
with schools, in order to compare between groups according to types of
establishment and assess the effects of school conditions on the perception of
students. A representative sample of Chilean secondary students between 9th and
12th grades participated (n = 3635, 52.8% women, average age 15.9 years, SD =
1.1). Descriptive analyses, comparison of means between groups, confirmatory
factorial analyses, and multi-group analyses were conducted to test the
adjustment and invariance of the unifactorial structure of a reduced version of
four items. The results indicated that the scale satisfactorily complies with the
proposed adjustment indexes, presents total invariance by gender and partial
invariance by administrative dependence, and allows establishing statistically
significant differences in the collective self-esteem, indicating a higher score 
for students in the private system, and a lower score for those in the public
system. These results show the negative effects of high school segregation on
students' collective self-esteem, affecting the appreciation of personal,
collective, and institutional activities and the sense of belonging. Although
previous research has explored some of the effects of school segregation, the
present study focuses on collective self-esteem, which is closely related to
identity and belonging, and allows for further innovative research on school
segregation. The scale is useful as an instrument for researching social
conditions of student well-being, in regards to educational management.

Copyright © 2021 Cuadros, Leal-Soto, Rubio and Sánchez.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.620011 
PMCID: PMC7843916
PMID: 33519644 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


149. Mol Psychiatry. 2021 Jan 27. doi: 10.1038/s41380-021-01029-w. [Epub ahead of
print]

Out-of-step: brain-heart desynchronization in anxiety disorders.

Tumati S(1)(2), Paulus MP(3), Northoff G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Mind, Brain imaging, and Neuroethics, Institute of Mental Health Research,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada. shankar.tumati@gmail.com.
(2)Neuropsychopharmacology research group, Sunnybrook Research Institute,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. shankar.tumati@gmail.com.
(3)Laureate Institute for Brain Research, Tulsa, OK, USA.
(4)Mind, Brain imaging, and Neuroethics, Institute of Mental Health Research,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.

Imaging studies in anxiety disorders (AD) show abnormal functional connectivity
primarily in the salience network (SN), somatomotor network (SMN), and default
mode network (DMN). However, it is not clear how precisely these network changes 
occur including their relation to psychopathological symptoms. Here, we show that
the functional networks affected in AD overlap with cortical regions that receive
visceral inputs (the so-called central/visceral autonomic network). Focusing on
cardiac afferents, we suggest that network changes in AD may be due to reduced
phase synchronization between ongoing neural and cardiac activity. This
neuro-cardiac desynchronization occurs due to the abnormal phase resetting of
neural activity at the onset of each heartbeat, as measured by a lower intertrial
coherence and heartbeat-evoked potential. Biochemically, cardiac afferents reach 
subcortical serotonergic raphe nuclei and noradrenergic locus coeruleus (among
others) which, in turn, are known to reciprocally modulate the DMN and SMN/SN on 
the cortical level. Consistent with the network changes in AD, decreases in
serotonergic and noradrenergic activity are known to increase connectivity in
both SMN and SN while, at the same time, they decrease DMN connectivity. SMN and 
SN increases, in turn, lead to increased emotional arousal/anxiety and bodily
awareness whereas decreased DMN connectivity leads to an unstable sense-of-self
in AD. Finally, we integrate our proposal with interoceptive predictive
processing models suggesting neuro-cardiac desynchronization as a mechanism for
"noisy" bottom-up information leading to a persistently uncertain bodily state in
top-down models. In sum, integrating theories on active interference and
hyperarousal, we propose a precise neuro-cardiac and biochemically -driven
mechanisms for key psychopathological symptoms of AD.

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-021-01029-w 
PMID: 33504952 


150. Int J Qual Stud Health Well-being. 2021 Dec;16(1):1879369. doi:
10.1080/17482631.2021.1879369.

Development of salutogenic coping skills: experiences with daily challenges among
young adults suffering from serious mental illness.

Hovland JF(1), Skogvang BO(1), Ness O(2), Langeland E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Sport Sciences, Faculty of Social and Health
Sciences, Inland Norway University of Applied Sciences , Elverum, Norway.
(2)Department of Education and Lifelong Learning, Norwegian University of Science
and Technology , Trondheim, Norway.
(3)Department of Health and Caring Science, Faculty of Health and Social
Sciences, Western Norway University of Applied Sciences , Bergen, Norway.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study is to explore experiences with daily
challenges and the development of salutogenic copings skills among young adults
with serious mental illness.
METHODS: Nine young adults with serious mental illness were interviewed. The
interviews were transcribed and subjected to reflexive thematic analysis.
RESULTS: Two main themes were identified through the analysis: "The influence of 
symptoms in everyday life and challenges with participating in the community" and
"Making the small things matter." The findings show that different life
experiences, or on-going challenges, often can affect or interfere their lives on
a daily basis, and that previous experiences with psychosis can contribute to the
development of salutogenic coping skills.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows the importance of increased knowledge and awareness
of different life experiences and challenges among people with serious mental
illness such as schizophrenia spectrum disorders. It is significant to strengthen
the ability to identify and use appropriate resistance resources to promote
salutogenic coping skills and thus better health. Furthermore, it is important to
be aware that the development of salutogenic coping skills must be personalized
to cultural contexts and society as well as supported by local communities,
families and services.

DOI: 10.1080/17482631.2021.1879369 
PMCID: PMC7850417
PMID: 33504275 


151. Support Care Cancer. 2021 Aug;29(8):4651-4662. doi: 10.1007/s00520-021-06003-4.
Epub 2021 Jan 26.

Moderating effect of sense of coherence on the relationship between symptom
distress and health-related quality of life in patients receiving cancer
chemotherapy.

Asaba K(1), Okawa A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, 
Japan. asaba.kaori@b.mbox.nagoya-u.ac.jp.
(2)Mie Prefectural College of Nursing, Tsu, Japan.

PURPOSE: This study is aimed at examining the buffering effect of sense of
coherence (SOC) on symptom distress during cancer drug therapy, which thereby
affects health-related quality of life (QoL), and obtaining suggestions for
promoting supportive care.
METHODS: We investigated health-related QoL (SF-8), symptom distress (using the
Symptom Distress Scale (SDS)), and SOC (the SOC 13-item Scale) in 66 patients
receiving adjuvant chemotherapy for non-small cell lung cancer. We employed
descriptive statistics to seek the correlation of each variable; then, a
hierarchical multiple regression analysis was conducted with SF-8 score as the
dependent variable.
RESULTS: Results showed that significant changes in bodily pain showed a
buffering effect on the SDS and sense of comprehensibility (β = - 0.658,
p < 0.01, β = - 0.319, p < 0.05), sense of manageability (β = - 0.658, p < 0.01, 
β = 0.398, p < 0.01), and meaningfulness (β = - 0.658, p < 0.01, β = - 0.257,
p < 0.05). Significant changes in general health perception showed a buffering
effect on the SDS and sense of manageability (β = - 0.406, p < 0.01, β = 0.329,
p < 0.05). As a result of the simple inclination test, SOC proved to be effective
under high levels of symptom distress; the buffering effect of sense of
manageability was reversed regarding bodily pain; and when meaningfulness was
lower, it had a positive effect on QoL.
CONCLUSION: This study revealed that SOC exerts a buffering effect in situations 
where symptoms are highly painful. It also revealed that the effect of SOC was
reversed for bodily pain and that a high SOC had a negative effect on QoL.

DOI: 10.1007/s00520-021-06003-4 
PMID: 33501621 


152. J Clin Periodontol. 2021 Jun;48(6):795-804. doi: 10.1111/jcpe.13429. Epub 2021
Feb 23.

Do psychological factors predict changes in oral health-related quality of life
and clinical status after periodontal treatment?

Rawlinson A(1), Vettore MV(2), Baker SR(1), Robinson PG(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Dentistry, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(2)Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Bristol Dental School, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.

AIMS: To determine psychological factors predicting changes in OHRQoL and
clinical status after periodontal treatment.
METHODS: Cohort of 140 patients with chronic periodontitis receiving non-surgical
treatment consisting of scaling, root surface debridement and instruction in
plaque control. Participants self-completed questionnaires enquiring about sense 
of coherence, locus of control, self-esteem and task-specific self-efficacy
before treatment, and the Oral Health Impact Profile-14 before treatment, at oral
hygiene review and end of study. Relationships among OHRQoL, clinical changes,
individual factors (demographic and psychological) and environmental
characteristics were analysed using latent growth curve modelling guided by the
Wilson and Cleary model.
RESULTS: OHRQoL and periodontal status improved after treatment. Being male and
having a greater sense of coherence predicted better OHRQoL before treatment.
Stronger internal dimension of locus of control predicted a greater rate of
improvement in OHRQoL, whereas greater external dimensions predicted a slower
rate of improvement. Greater task-specific self-efficacy predicted less gains in 
probing attachment and reductions in probing depth.
CONCLUSIONS: Knowledge of psychological factors may be helpful in explaining
individual differences in OHRQoL and clinical responses to periodontal treatment,
and in identifying where health-promoting interventions may strengthen relevant
factors to improve these outcomes.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcpe.13429 
PMID: 33476416  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Matern Child Nutr. 2021 Apr;17(2):e13114. doi: 10.1111/mcn.13114. Epub 2021 Jan
20.

UNICEF UK Baby Friendly Initiative: Providing, receiving and leading infant
feeding care in a hospital maternity setting-A critical ethnography.

Byrom A(1), Thomson G(2), Dooris M(1), Dykes F(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Community Health and Midwifery, University of Central Lancashire,
Preston, UK.
(2)Maternal and Infant Nutrition and Nurture Unit (MAINN), University of Central 
Lancashire, Preston, UK.

Although breastfeeding is known to improve health, economic and environmental
outcomes, breastfeeding initiation and continuation rates are low in the United
Kingdom. The global WHO/UNICEF Baby Friendly Hospital Initiative (BFHI) aims to
reverse declining rates of breastfeeding by shifting the culture of infant
feeding care provision throughout hospital maternity settings. In the United
Kingdom, the global BFHI has been adapted by UNICEF UK reflecting a paradigm
shift towards the experiences of women and families using maternity services.
This research used a critical ethnographic approach to explore the influence of
the national UNICEF UK Baby Friendly Initiative (BFI) standards on the culture of
one typical maternity service in England, over a period of 8 weeks, across four
phases of data collection between 2011 and 2017. Twenty-one staff and 26 service 
users were recruited and engaged in moderate-level participant observation and/or
guided interviews and conversations. Basic, organising and a final global theme
emerged through thematic network analysis, describing the influence of the BFI on
providing, receiving and leading infant feeding care in a hospital maternity
setting. Using Antonovsky's sense of coherence construct, the findings discussed 
in this paper highlight how the BFI offers 'informational' (comprehensible),
'practical' (manageable) and 'emotional' (meaningful) support for both staff and 
service users, strengthened by effective, local leadership and a team approach.
This is juxtaposed against the tensions and demands of the busy hospital
maternity setting. It is recommended that ongoing infant feeding policy, practice
and leadership balance relational and rational approaches for positive infant
feeding care and experiences to flourish.

© 2021 The Authors. Maternal & Child Nutrition published by John Wiley & Sons
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mcn.13114 
PMCID: PMC7988865
PMID: 33471431 


154. Qual Manag Health Care. 2021 Jan 15. doi: 10.1097/QMH.0000000000000293. [Epub
ahead of print]

Psychological Well-being in Adult Patients Suffering From Congenital Heart
Disease: A Salutogenic Approach From a Chilean Experience.

Barreda RL(1), Bernales M, Guerrero A, de la Cuadra JC, Baraona F, Macdonald J.

Author information: 
(1)Assistant Professor Department of Anaesthesia Pontificia Universidad Católica 
de Chile Macul, Santiago de Chile Assistant Professor Faculty of Medicine
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile Macul, Santiago de Chile mmbernal@uc.cl 
Research Assistant School of Medicine Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
Macul, Santiago de Chile Assistant Professor Department of Cardiology Pontificia 
Universidad Católica de Chile Macul, Santiago de Chile Department of Cardiology
Instituto Nacional del Tórax Santiago, Chile Emeritus Professor and Founding
Chair in Primary Health Care Western Sydney University Richmond, New South Wales,
Australia.

DOI: 10.1097/QMH.0000000000000293 
PMID: 33470776 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


155. Sci Total Environ. 2021 May 1;767:144612. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.144612.
Epub 2020 Dec 25.

Global-scale massive feature extraction from monthly hydroclimatic time series:
Statistical characterizations, spatial patterns and hydrological similarity.

Papacharalampous G(1), Tyralis H(2), Papalexiou SM(3), Langousis A(4), Khatami
S(5), Volpi E(6), Grimaldi S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Engineering, Roma Tre University, Rome, Italy; Department of
Civil Engineering, School of Engineering, University of Patras, University
Campus, Rio, 26504 Patras, Greece; Department of Water Resources and
Environmental Engineering, School of Civil Engineering, National Technical
University of Athens, Heroon Polytechneiou 5, 15780 Zographou, Greece. Electronic
address: papacharalampous.georgia@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Water Resources and Environmental Engineering, School of Civil
Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, Heroon Polytechneiou 5,
15780 Zographou, Greece; Air Force Support Command, Hellenic Air Force, Elefsina 
Air Base, 19200 Elefsina, Greece. Electronic address: montchrister@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Civil, Geological and Environmental Engineering, University of
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada; Global Institute for Water
Security, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada; Faculty of Environmental Sciences,
Czech University of Life Sciences Prague, Czech Republic. Electronic address:
sm.papalexiou@usask.ca.
(4)Department of Civil Engineering, School of Engineering, University of Patras, 
University Campus, Rio, 26504 Patras, Greece. Electronic address:
andlag@alum.mit.edu.
(5)Department of Physical Geography and the Bolin Centre for Climate Research,
Stockholm University, SE-10691 Stockholm, Sweden; Climate & Energy College,
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; Department of
Infrastructure Engineering, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia. Electronic address: sina.khatami@natgeo.su.se.
(6)Department of Engineering, Roma Tre University, Rome, Italy. Electronic
address: elena.volpi@uniroma3.it.
(7)Department for Innovation in Biological, Agro-food and Forest Systems,
University of Tuscia, Viterbo, Italy; Department of Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering, Tandon School of Engineering, New York University, Brooklyn, NY
10003, USA. Electronic address: salvatore.grimaldi@unitus.it.

Hydroclimatic time series analysis focuses on a few feature types (e.g.,
autocorrelations, trends, extremes), which describe a small portion of the entire
information content of the observations. Aiming to exploit a larger part of the
available information and, thus, to deliver more reliable results (e.g., in
hydroclimatic time series clustering contexts), here we approach hydroclimatic
time series analysis differently, i.e., by performing massive feature extraction.
In this respect, we develop a big data framework for hydroclimatic variable
behaviour characterization. This framework relies on approximately 60 diverse
features and is completely automatic (in the sense that it does not depend on the
hydroclimatic process at hand). We apply the new framework to characterize mean
monthly temperature, total monthly precipitation and mean monthly river flow. The
applications are conducted at the global scale by exploiting 40-year-long time
series originating from over 13 000 stations. We extract interpretable knowledge 
on seasonality, trends, autocorrelation, long-range dependence and entropy, and
on feature types that are met less frequently. We further compare the examined
hydroclimatic variable types in terms of this knowledge and, identify patterns
related to the spatial variability of the features. For this latter purpose, we
also propose and exploit a hydroclimatic time series clustering methodology. This
new methodology is based on Breiman's random forests. The descriptive and
exploratory insights gained by the global-scale applications prove the usefulness
of the adopted feature compilation in hydroclimatic contexts. Moreover, the
spatially coherent patterns characterizing the clusters delivered by the new
methodology build confidence in its future exploitation. Given this spatial
coherence and the scale-independent nature of the delivered feature values (which
makes them particularly useful in forecasting and simulation contexts), we
believe that this methodology could also be beneficial within regionalization
frameworks, in which knowledge on hydrological similarity is exploited in
technical and operative terms.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.144612 
PMID: 33454612 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest We declare no
conflict of interest.


156. BMC Ophthalmol. 2021 Jan 14;21(1):37. doi: 10.1186/s12886-020-01791-5.

X-linked dominant RPGR gene mutation in a familial Coats angiomatosis.

Nebbioso M(1), Franzone F(1), Lambiase A(2)(3), La Cava M(1), Mallone F(1),
Pizzuti A(#)(4), Marchionni E(#)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sense Organs, Faculty of Medicine and Odontology, Sapienza
University of Rome, p. le A. Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Sense Organs, Faculty of Medicine and Odontology, Sapienza
University of Rome, p. le A. Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy.
alessandro.lambiase@uniroma1.it.
(3)Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale del Policlinico
155, 00161, Rome, Italy. alessandro.lambiase@uniroma1.it.
(4)Department of Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Odontology,
Sapienza University of Rome, p. le A. Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) is the most frequent retinal hereditary
disease and every kind of transmission pattern has been described. The genetic
etiology of RP is extremely heterogeneous and in the last few years the large
application of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) approaches improved the
diagnostic yield, elucidating previously unexplained RP causes and new
genotype-phenotype correlations. The objective of this study was to reevaluate a 
previously reported family affected by Coats'-type RP without genetic diagnosis
and to describe the new genetic findings.
CASE PRESENTATION: Cohort, prospective, and single-center observational family
case. Three individuals of a family, consisting of a mother and four sons, with a
Coats phenotype were revaluated after 25 years of clinical follow-up using visual
acuity tests, ophthalmoscopy, Goldmann visual field, electroretinography (ERG),
and spectral domain-optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT). Specifically, a RP NGS
panel was performed on one member of the family and segregation analysis was
required for the other affected and unaffected members. NGS analysis disclosed a 
RPGR (Retinitis Pigmentosa GTPase Regulator) gene truncating variant segregating 
with the phenotype in all the three affected members. RPGR mutations are reported
as causative of an X-linked RP.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first reported family with a Coats'-type RP associated
to a RPGR mutation and segregating as a dominant X-linked disease, confirming the
hypothesis of the genetic origin of this condition and expanding the phenotypic
spectrum of diseases caused by RPGR gene mutations. The Authors suggest RPGR gene
screening mutations in patients presenting this phenotype.

DOI: 10.1186/s12886-020-01791-5 
PMCID: PMC7807486
PMID: 33446141  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Aging Ment Health. 2021 Jan 15:1-8. doi: 10.1080/13607863.2021.1872488. [Epub
ahead of print]

Sense of coherence can predict hope in older adults: a cross-lagged analysis.

Lin Y(1), Zhang B(1), Xu R(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, China.

OBJECTIVES: This study examined the relationship between sense of coherence (SOC)
and hope in older adults from a longitudinal perspective.
METHOD: 271 older adults completed self-reported questionnaires assessing hope
and SOC at 3 time points: at intake, at a 6-month follow-up, and at a 12-month
follow-up. A cross-lagged panel model was used to examine the relationship
between SOC and hope.
RESULTS: The results showed that SOC was significantly associated with the level 
of hope in the older adults at all three time points. The cross-lagged analysis
showed that the lagged effect of SOC on hope was significant, whereas the lagged 
effect of the level of hope on SOC was nonsignificant.
CONCLUSION: These results indicated that SOC predicted the level of hope 6 months
later and may be helpful for guiding older adults to increase their hope for the 
future through strategies aimed at improving their SOC.

DOI: 10.1080/13607863.2021.1872488 
PMID: 33445963 


158. Spec Care Dentist. 2021 Mar;41(2):170-177. doi: 10.1111/scd.12560. Epub 2021 Jan 
13.

Mother's sense of coherence and dental characteristics in children and
adolescents with osteogenesis imperfecta: A paired study.

Teixeira SA(1), Santos PCM(2), Carneiro TCB(3), Paiva SM(4), Valadares ER(5),
Borges-Oliveira AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social and Preventive Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte,
Brazil.
(3)Orthopaedics and Traumatology Sector, Rehabilitation Association of Minas
Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(4)Department of Pediatric Dentistry IFaculty of Dentistry, Federal University of
Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(5)Department of Pediatric, Hospital da Baleia, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The relevance of sense of coherence (SOC) is important to the
wellbeing of parents, especially mothers of children and adolescents with
osteogenesis imperfecta (OI).
OBJECTIVE: Determine whether the oral health status of children/adolescents with 
OI is associated with mother's SOC.
MATERIALS AND METHOD: A paired cross-sectional study was conducted with 37
children/adolescents with OI, 37 without OI, and their respective mothers. The
children/adolescents were between two and 19 years of age, mean age 7.2 years,
being 47 male and 27 female. The mothers completed Antonovsky's SOC questionnaire
(SOC-13), and the oral status of the children/adolescents was investigated. The
following clinical conditions were evaluated: dentinogenesis imperfecta,
malocclusion, gingivitis, and dental caries experience.
RESULTS: The genetic condition of the children was significantly associated with 
mother's SOC (P < .001). Mothers of children with OI had lower SOC scores (mean: 
35.6 [± 4.9]) than mothers of children without OI (mean: 38.5 [± 4.3]). In the
group with OI, a low socioeconomic status was associated with lower mother's SOC 
scores (P = .004). In both groups, dental caries experience was associated with
lower mother's SOC scores (P = .007). Most individuals with OI presented
malocclusion (78.3%) and experience of dental caries (59.4%).
CONCLUSION: Having a child with OI influenced the sense of coherence of the
mothers. Socioeconomic status and dental caries experience in children and
adolescents with OI were associated with mother's SOC.

© 2021 Special Care Dentistry Association and Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/scd.12560 
PMID: 33439479  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Aging Ment Health. 2021 Jan 13:1-10. doi: 10.1080/13607863.2020.1870206. [Epub
ahead of print]

Sense of coherence mediates the relationship between digital health literacy and 
anxiety about the future in aging population during the COVID-19 pandemic: a path
analysis.

Leung AYM(1)(2), Parial LL(1)(3), Tolabing MC(4), Sim T(5), Mo P(6), Okan O(7),
Dadaczynski K(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Gerontological Nursing, School of Nursing, Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Kowloon, Hong Kong.
(2)World Health Organization Collaborating Centre for Community Health Services, 
School of Nursing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon, Hong Kong.
(3)College of Nursing, University of Santo Tomas, Manila, Philippines.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, College of Public Health,
University of the Philippines, Manila, Philippines.
(5)Department of Applied Social Sciences, Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
Kowloon, Hong Kong.
(6)Jockey Club School of Public Health and Primary Care; Centre for Health
Behaviours Research, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong.
(7)Bielefeld University, Faculty of Educational Science, Interdisciplinary Centre
for Health Literacy Research, Bielefeld, Germany.
(8)Public Health Centre Fulda, Fulda University of Applied Sciences, Fulda,
Germany.
(9)Center for Applied Health Science, Leuphana University Lueneburg, Lueneburg,
Germany.

Objectives: During the COVID-19 pandemic, older adults experience various
challenges, including information uncertainties, financial pressure, and visit
restrictions, which may lead to anxiety about the future. As a protective factor,
sense of coherence (SOC) may play a role to reduce some psychological discomfort.
This study aimed to analyze the relationships of SOC with anxiety, digital health
literacy (DHL), information, and financial satisfaction among older adults during
the outbreak.Methods: This is part of a large-scale DHL study with a
cross-sectional survey across 41 countries. This study extracted data from three 
Asian countries (China, the Philippines, and Singapore) and included people aged 
≥60. Structural equation modeling with path analysis was utilized to examine the 
relationships of SOC with anxiety about the future and other variables.Results: A
total of 266 older adults were included, with 43.2% expressed anxiety about the
future. DHL (β=-0.13, p < 0.05) and SOC (β=-0.26, p = 0.01) were negatively
associated with anxiety, while financial and information satisfaction were not.
However, financial satisfaction (β = 0.34, p < 0.01) and DHL (β = 0.32, p = 0.01)
were positively associated with SOC. Higher SOC further mediated the negative
relationships of DHL (β= -0.11, p = 0.004) and financial satisfaction (β= -0.12, 
p = 0.004) on anxiety of older adults.Conclusions: SOC had direct negative effect
on anxiety and mediated the relationships between anxiety and DHL/financial
satisfaction. Strategies should be developed to enhance SOC and DHL among older
adults, as these capacities may help to manage anxiety during the pandemic.

DOI: 10.1080/13607863.2020.1870206 
PMID: 33438448 


160. Hum Fertil (Camb). 2021 Jan 12:1-13. doi: 10.1080/14647273.2021.1871781. [Epub
ahead of print]

Relationships between infertility-related stress, family sense of coherence and
quality of life of couples with infertility.

Ngai FW(1), Loke AY(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon, Hong Kong.

This is a cross-sectional study with the objective to examine the relationships
between infertility-related stress, family sense of coherence and quality of life
of Chinese couples with infertility in Hong Kong. A convenience sample of 135
Chinese couples were recruited at the subfertility clinics of the Family Planning
Association of Hong Kong. Data were collected using the Fertility Problem
Inventory, Family Sense of Coherence Scale and Fertility Quality of Life. Path
analysis was used for data analysis. The results showed that infertility-related 
stress had a negative association with the quality of life of infertile couples
and family sense of coherence mediated the effect of infertility-related stress
on quality of life for both partners. The infertility-related stress of women had
a negative association with their husbands' quality of life. Infertile women had 
more infertility-related stress and a lower quality of life than their husbands. 
The findings provide new insights into the importance of family sense of
coherence in facilitating couples' adjustment to infertility. Culturally
competent heath care interventions should be developed to strengthen family sense
of coherence among Chinese couples with infertility and help them reduce their
infertility-related stress, thus improving their quality of life.

DOI: 10.1080/14647273.2021.1871781 
PMID: 33432870 


161. Work. 2021;68(1):171-180. doi: 10.3233/WOR-203366.

Health behavior, sleep quality and subjective health status among Hungarian
nurses working varying shifts.

Fusz K(1), Kívés Z(2), Pakai A(3), Kutfej N(4), Deák A(5), Oláh A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, Medical School, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary.
(2)Institute of Health Insurance, Faculty of Health Science, University of écs,
Pécs, Hungary.
(3)Institute of Nursing Sciences, Basic Health Sciences and Health Visiting,
Faculty of Health Science, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, Clinical Centre, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary.
(5)Department of Emergency Medicine, Clinical Centre, University of Pécs, Pécs,
Hungary.

BACKGROUND: Distinctly, shift work is burdensome for nurses and may lead to
health problems.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of the study was to examine the nursing shift system
genres and to analyze the potentially debilitating effects upon sleep quality and
the subjective state of physical and mental health when considering varying shift
schedules.
METHODS: The first cross-sectional study (n = 639) was performed at the Clinical 
Center at the University of Pécs, and throughout various hospitals in the
South-Danubian Region. The Hungarian version of the Bergen Shift Work Sleep
Questionnaire, the Berlin Questionnaire and the 13-item Sense of Coherence Scale 
were implemented. In the longitudinal survey (n = 52), the quality of sleep was
determined by the ActiGraph GT1M type of activity meter supplemented with a sleep
diary.
RESULTS: Interestingly, most respondents weight gained among the irregular
schedule group (p = 0.004). The nurses working a flexible schedule reportedly
slept better (p = 0.003), had a higher sense of coherence (p = 0.013) and
exhibited better subjective health status (p = 0.017) than when compared with
nurses working irregular shifts. The frequency of psychosomatic complaints
aligned with the length of rest periods proved influential (p = 0.013).
CONCLUSION: Admittedly, the irregularity of work schedules is stressful for
nurses. Due to the health status of nurses, it is a worthy consideration to
establish the least exhausting work schedules.

DOI: 10.3233/WOR-203366 
PMID: 33427718  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Front Public Health. 2020 Dec 18;8:521355. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2020.521355.
eCollection 2020.

A Digital Tool to Build the Capacity of Leaders to Improve Working Conditions
Related to Psychological Health and Well-Being in Teams: Intervention Approach,
Prototype, and Evaluation Design of the Web-Application "wecoach".

Grimm LA(1), Bauer GF(1), Jenny GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Salutogenesis, University of Zurich, Epidemiology, Biostatistics and
Prevention Institute, Zurich, Switzerland.

The "wecoach" is a web-application that builds the capacities of team leaders to 
improve working conditions that are positively related to the psychological
health and well-being of their team members. The web-application works through an
automated, rule-based chat enhanced by machine learning. This so-called
conversational agent guides the team leader through a systematic project cycle,
providing a mind map of work and health, training materials, self-assessments,
and online tools to conduct team surveys and workshops, as well as
self-evaluation of progress and effectiveness. In this paper, we present the
development process of this web-application, which resulted in (1) a
comprehensive intervention approach, (2) the prototype, and (3) the
implementation of an evaluation design for a multi-level, randomized controlled
trial.

Copyright © 2020 Grimm, Bauer and Jenny.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2020.521355 
PMCID: PMC7793658
PMID: 33425825  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: GB and GJ are board members of the University
Spin-Off that distributes the wecoach. The remaining author declares that the
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


163. Acta Odontol Scand. 2021 Jul;79(5):377-382. doi: 10.1080/00016357.2020.1869825.
Epub 2021 Jan 11.

Long-term patient satisfaction and the sense of coherence - a longitudinal study 
10-15 years after orthognathic surgery.

Kämäräinen M(1)(2), Savolainen J(1), Tynkkynen J(1), Kellokoski J(1)(2), Pahkala 
R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Institute of Dentistry, University of Eastern
Finland, Kuopio, Finland.
(2)Oral and Maxillofacial Department, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio,
Finland.

OBJECTIVE: This study focuses on evaluating the long-term treatment outcome
(10-15 years) and patient satisfaction after orthognathic treatment with
bisagittal split osteotomy (BSSO). Furthermore, the aim was to evaluate whether
the psychosocial factor, sense of coherence (SOC) associates with long-term
patient satisfaction.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Study sample consisted of 57 patients who had orthognathic
treatment with BSSO. Self-completion questionnaires were distributed
approximately 1.8 years and 10-15 years after surgery to evaluate treatment
outcome. SOC was evaluated with a 12-scale questionnaire 10-15 years after the
surgery.
RESULTS: After 10-15 years following BSSO, 96% of patients were highly or
moderately satisfied with the treatment outcome and none expressed
dissatisfaction. Less educated patients were more satisfied with the treatment
outcome than those with a higher educational level. Patients who felt clear
improvement in their facial appearance expressed higher satisfaction than those
experiencing only minor facial improvement. Furthermore, patients with
improvement in orofacial pains and headaches more often expressed high
satisfaction than those without improvement of these symptoms. Patients with
strong SOC seemed to have somewhat higher scores for functional aspects of
long-term treatment outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: Post-treatment satisfaction with orthognathic treatment appears to
be long-lasting. Psychosocial factors may play a role in long-term post-treatment
satisfaction. Our study strongly suggests that psychosocial factors should be
taken into account in the treatment planning of orthognathic patients.

DOI: 10.1080/00016357.2020.1869825 
PMID: 33423587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Nutrition. 2021 Mar;83:111094. doi: 10.1016/j.nut.2020.111094. Epub 2020 Nov 24.

To bee or not to bee? The bee extract propolis as a bioactive compound in the
burden of lifestyle diseases.

Alvarenga L(1), Cardozo LFMF(2), Borges NA(3), Chermut TR(4), Ribeiro M(4), Leite
M Jr(5), Shiels PG(6), Stenvinkel P(7), Mafra D(8).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Medical Sciences, Fluminense Federal University, Niterói, 
Brazil. Electronic address: liviaalvarenga92@gmail.com.
(2)Graduate Program in Cardiovascular Sciences, Fluminense Federal University,
Niterói, Brazil.
(3)Graduate Program in Cardiovascular Sciences, Fluminense Federal University,
Niterói, Brazil; Graduate Program in Nutrition Sciences, Fluminense Federal
University, Niterói, Brazil; Institute of Nutrition, Rio de Janeiro State
University, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Graduate Program in Nutrition Sciences, Fluminense Federal University,
Niterói, Brazil.
(5)Division of Nephrology, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
(6)Wolfson Wohl Translational Research Centre, ICS, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, Scotland.
(7)Division of Renal Medicine, Department of Clinical Science, Technology and
Intervention, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Graduate Program in Medical Sciences, Fluminense Federal University, Niterói, 
Brazil; Graduate Program in Cardiovascular Sciences, Fluminense Federal
University, Niterói, Brazil; Graduate Program in Nutrition Sciences, Fluminense
Federal University, Niterói, Brazil.

Propolis is a polyphenolic plant resin collected by bees to protect hives against
pathogens and temperature drop. It exhibits antibacterial, antioxidant, and
antiinflammatory properties. Propolis has been reported to possess antidiabetic
properties and display beneficial effects against cardiovascular disease, gut
dysbiosis, and chronic kidney disease. It has an excellent clinical safety
profile, with no known toxic effects described so far. In this review, we discuss
the salutogenic effects of propolis, with particular reference to modulating
notable features of chronic kidney disease, notably those involving
cardiovascular risks.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nut.2020.111094 
PMID: 33418489  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


165. SAGE Open Nurs. 2020 Mar 3;6:2377960820907778. doi: 10.1177/2377960820907778.
eCollection 2020 Jan-Dec.

Loneliness Among Cognitively Intact Residents of Nursing Homes With and Without
Cancer: A 6-Year Longitudinal Study.

Drageset J(1)(2), Eide GE(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Faculty of Health and Social Sciences, Western Norway
University of Applied Sciences, Bergen, Norway.
(2)Department of Global Public Health and Primary Care, University of Bergen,
Norway.
(3)Centre for Clinical Research, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

Limited information exists regarding the natural development of loneliness and
its determinants among cognitively intact nursing home residents. We aimed to
examine loneliness among nursing home residents by following up for 6 years and
to determine whether sociodemographic factors, diagnosis of cancer, sense of
coherence, social support, and depression symptoms influence loneliness. The
study was longitudinal and prospective and included baseline assessment and
6-year follow-up. After baseline assessment of 227 cognitively intact nursing
home residents (Clinical Dementia Rating score ≤0.5), 52 respondents were
interviewed a second time at the 5-year follow-up and 18 respondents a third time
at the 6-year follow-up. Data from the interviews were recorded using a global
question of loneliness, the Social Provisions Scale, Sense of Coherence Scale,
and Geriatric Depression Scale. Scores on Groll's index (p = .02) and the Sense
of Coherence Scale (p = .04) were positively correlated with loneliness and
negatively correlated with geriatric depression (p = .001). Having a diagnosis of
cancer, social support, and age were not correlated with loneliness 6 years from 
baseline. Loneliness did not change during the 6 years of follow-up, and symptoms
of depression and the sense of coherence appeared to be important components of
loneliness. Finally, having a diagnosis of cancer and social support were not
associated with loneliness.

© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1177/2377960820907778 
PMCID: PMC7774416
PMID: 33415270 

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.


166. Personal Disord. 2021 Jan 7. doi: 10.1037/per0000476. [Epub ahead of print]

Narrative identity in borderline personality disorder.

Sajjadi SF(1), Gross J(1), Sellbom M(1), Hayne H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology.

Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is a severe psychiatric condition that is
associated with functional impairment and pathological traits. It has been argued
that identity impairment is one of the core features of BPD, which can be
manifested in different ways, including fragmented autobiographical narratives.
Here, we considered both the traditional and modern conceptualizations of BPD to 
examine the relation between identity impairment, as operationalized through
autobiographical memory, and features of BPD. We hypothesized that BPD features
would be associated with higher levels of fragmentation in narrative identity,
narrative intimacy, and narrative coherence in participants' autobiographical
memory. To test this hypothesis, we recruited 298 university students who were
administered a series of self-report measures of BPD and were asked to describe
an autobiographical memory about a turning point in their lives. Narrative
identity, but not narrative intimacy nor coherence, was the dominant predictor of
BPD features. We discuss our findings in terms of how individuals with features
of BPD struggle with many aspects of a distorted sense of self. (PsycInfo
Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/per0000476 
PMID: 33411562 


167. Matern Child Nutr. 2021 Apr;17(2):e13126. doi: 10.1111/mcn.13126. Epub 2021 Jan
6.

Life course learning experiences and infant feeding practices in rural Rwanda.

Ahishakiye J(1)(2), Vaandrager L(2), Brouwer ID(3), Koelen M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutrition and Dietetics, College of Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of Rwanda, Kigali, Rwanda.
(2)Health and Society Chair Group, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The
Netherlands.
(3)Division of Human Nutrition and Health, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The
Netherlands.

Most studies about infant and young child feeding (IYCF) practices are often
perceived as an individual choice depending on mothers' or caregivers' knowledge 
or attitudes and are focused on mothers' failure rather than successes in
adequately feeding their children. However, the role of life course experiences
in IYCF is less investigated. Applying a Salutogenic Model of Health, this study 
on 14 mothers looks at women's life course learning experiences shaping
appropriate IYCF practices during the first year of child's life in a rural
district of Rwanda. Transcripts from in-depth interviews were analysed using
thematic analysis. Results indicate that positive social interaction with parents
or grandmothers during childhood such as sharing meals, parental role models for 
dietary choices and cooking skills gained by participating in household food
preparation played a role in shaping appropriate IYCF practices. Negative
experiences during childhood also had a positive influence on IYCF practices for 
some participants by converting life course constraints into learning
opportunities. Motherhood increased mothers' sense of responsibility over their
children's health and nutrition. Moreover, mothers' participation in community
cooking classes and role modelling approach were strong avenues that enabled
their learning through positive interactions and encouragement. Nutrition
promotion interventions should consider tailoring nutrition advice to the
complexity of mothers' life course experiences by creating opportunities for
positive learning experiences of appropriate IYCF practices.

© 2021 The Authors. Maternal & Child Nutrition published by John Wiley & Sons
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mcn.13126 
PMCID: PMC7988879
PMID: 33410268 


168. Front Psychiatry. 2020 Dec 21;11:556486. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.556486.
eCollection 2020.

The Stress of Caring-Resilience and HPA-Axis Activity in Hair Samples of Youth
Residential Caregivers.

Bürgin D(1), Kind N(1), Schröder M(1), Clemens V(2), Fegert JM(2), Eckert A(3),
Buchheim A(4), O'Donovan A(5)(6), Boonmann C(1), Schmid M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Research Department, University Psychiatric
Hospitals, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Department for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University
Hospital Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(3)Neurobiological Laboratory for Brain Aging and Mental Health, Transfaculty
Research Platform, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Institute of Psychology, University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Weill Institute for Neurosciences, University of 
California, San Francisco, CA, United States.
(6)Mental Health Services, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San
Francisco, CA, United States.

Background: Professional caregivers in youth residential care institutions
experience frequent verbal and physical aggression as well as multiple stressors 
as part of their everyday work, leading to high levels of burnout and staff
turnover. Resilience might buffer against psychophysiological stress response and
therefore be crucial for well-being in professional caregivers. Objectives: We
aimed to investigate if measures related to resilience [sense of coherence (SoC),
self-efficacy and self-care] and attachment security of caregivers were
cross-sectionally associated with stress markers in hair samples [cortisol and
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA)]. Method: Participants (n = 134; 64.2% women)
reported on individual resilience measures and provided hair samples for cortisol
and DHEA assays. Attachment was assessed in a subsample using the Adult
Attachment Projective Picture System (AAP, n = 69). Linear regression models were
fitted to estimate the association between resilience measures and the
Cortisol:DHEA ratio, cortisol and DHEA, controlling for gender and age. Results: 
SoC was associated with a lower Cortisol:DHEA ratio (β = -0.36, p < 0.001),
driven by a positive association between SoC and DHEA levels (β = 0.28, p =
0.002). Self-care was also associated with lower Cortisol:DHEA ratios (β = -0.24,
p = 0.005), due to self-care being associated with higher DHEA (β = 0.21, p =
0.016). HPA-axis measures were not associated with self-efficacy nor with
attachment patterns in a subsample. Conclusions: Our findings imply that youth
residential care institutions might benefit from programs focusing on enhancing
SoC and self-care practices. Fostering a meaningful, comprehensible and
manageable professional climate in caregiving environments and implementing
self-care in routine practices might enhance not only well-being but also
physical health of professional caregivers and in this way buffer adverse health 
effects of chronic stressors.

Copyright © 2020 Bürgin, Kind, Schröder, Clemens, Fegert, Eckert, Buchheim,
O'Donovan, Boonmann and Schmid.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.556486 
PMCID: PMC7779549
PMID: 33408649 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


169. Arch Sex Behav. 2021 Apr;50(3):1015-1032. doi: 10.1007/s10508-020-01845-1. Epub
2021 Jan 4.

Risk and Protective Factors for Social Anxiety Among Sexual Minority Individuals.

Mahon CP(1), Pachankis JE(2), Kiernan G(3), Gallagher P(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, Dublin City University, 620 Collins Ave Ext, Glasnevin, 
Dublin 9, D09 X984, Ireland. conor.mahon24@mail.dcu.ie.
(2)Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences, Yale School of Public Health,
New Haven, CT, USA.
(3)School of Nursing, Psychotherapy and Community Health, Dublin City University,
Dublin, Ireland.
(4)School of Psychology, Dublin City University, 620 Collins Ave Ext, Glasnevin, 
Dublin 9, D09 X984, Ireland.

Erratum in
    Arch Sex Behav. 2021 Mar 8;:.

Minority stress processes represent clear determinants of social anxiety among
sexual minority populations. Yet sources of resilience to social anxiety are less
explored as are stressors experienced from within sexual minority communities
(i.e., intraminority stress). Based on minority stress theory and the
psychological mediation framework, we hypothesized that experiences of
discrimination and intraminority stress would predict proximal minority stress
processes, including internalized homonegativity, sexual concealment behavior,
and rejection sensitivity, as well as two resilience factors-sense of coherence
and LGBTQ community connectedness-to explain social anxiety among sexual minority
individuals. Self-identified cisgender sexual minority women (n = 245) and men
(n = 256) residing in the Republic of Ireland completed an online survey. Results
from a structural equation modeling analysis indicated that the data fit the
hypothesized model well for both women and men. For both sexual minority women
and men, experiences of discrimination and intraminority stress were indirectly
associated with social anxiety via two paths (1) increased rejection sensitivity 
and (2) reduced sense of coherence. Intraminority stress was indirectly
associated with social anxiety via increased concealment behavior for sexual
minority men only. Experiences of discrimination were indirectly associated with 
social anxiety via a sequential pathway through increased proximal minority
stress (i.e., concealment behavior and internalized homonegativity), and reduced 
LGBTQ community connectedness solely among sexual minority women. Findings are
discussed in terms of implications for future research and clinical practice with
sexual minority individuals who suffer from social anxiety.

DOI: 10.1007/s10508-020-01845-1 
PMID: 33398699  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2021 Jan;128(1):105-114. doi:
10.1007/s00702-020-02280-1. Epub 2021 Jan 4.

Associations between APOE-, COMT Val108/158Met- and BDNF Val66Met polymorphisms
and variations in depressive and anxiety symptoms, sense of coherence and vital
exhaustion in the real-life setting of mandatory basic military training.

Alexopoulos P(#)(1)(2), Papanastasiou AD(#)(3), Εconomou P(4), Beis P(5), Niforas
M(6)(7), Dassios TG(6)(8), Kormpaki A(6), Zarkadis IK(9), Reichel M(10)(11),
Kornhuber J(10), Perneczky R(12)(13)(14)(15), Gourzis P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, School of Health Sciences,
University of Patras, University Hospital of Patras, 26504, Rion Patras, Greece. 
panos.alexopoulos@upatras.gr.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Faculty of Medicine, Technical
University of Munich, Klinikum Rechts Der Isar, Ismaninger Strasse 22, 81675,
Munich, Germany. panos.alexopoulos@upatras.gr.
(3)Deparment of Biomedical Sciences, University of West Attica, Ag. Spyridonos
Street, 12243, Egaleo, Greece.
(4)Department of Civil Engineering (Statistics), School of Engineering,
University of Patras, 26504, Rion Patras, Greece.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, School of Health Sciences,
University of Patras, University Hospital of Patras, 26504, Rion Patras, Greece.
(6)Health Unit, Training Center of Technical Corps of the Hellenic Army,
Maragkopoulou Str. 2, 26331, Patras, Greece.
(7)Department of Orthopaedic and Accident Surgery, Center for Foot and
Endoprothetic Joint Surgery, Malteser Clinics Rhein-Ruhr Duisburg, St.
Johannesstift, Johannisstr. 21, 47198, Duisburg-Homberg, Germany.
(8)Department of Women and Children's Health, School of Life Course Sciences,
Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, King's College London, St Thomas'
Hospital, Westminster Bridge Road, London, SE1 7EH, UK.
(9)Laboratory of General Biology, Faculty of Medicine, School of Health Sciences,
University of Patras, 26504, Rion Patras, Greece.
(10)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Friedrich-Alexander-University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Schwabachanlage 6, 91054, Erlangen, Germany.
(11)Department of Nephrology and Medical Intensive Care,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, 10117, Berlin, Germany.
(12)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital, LMU Munich
Nussbaumstraße 7, 80336, Munich, Germany.
(13)Ageing Epidemiology (AGE) Research Unit, Faculty of Medicine, School of
Public Health, The Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, London, 
SW7 2AZ, UK.
(14)Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17, 81377, 
Munich, Germany.
(15)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Munich,
Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 17, 81377, Munich, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

Apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε, catechol-O-methytranferase (COMT) Val108/158Met and
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) Val66Met single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) were shown to affect stress perception and response. The present study
explored possible associations between these SNPs and changes in subclinical
anxiety- and depressive symptoms, sense of coherence (SOC) and vital exhaustion
(VE) during compulsory basic military training. The study encompassed 179
conscripts of a training base in Greece. The neuropsychiatric assessment was
based on the Beck Depression Inventory, the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory, the
Antonovsky SOC scale and the Maastricht Questionnaire. It was conducted at three 
time points of the 19-day basic military training: on day one (baseline), day six
(follow-up I) and day 13 (follow-up II). Statistical analyses included
Mann-Whitney test, Chi-square test and cross-sectional time series regression
models based on the Skillings-Mack statistic. APOE ε4 non-carriers encountered
significant changes in anxiety- and depressive symptoms and SOC (in all cases
P < 0.001) over the observation period, whilst ε4 carriers did not. The changes
in anxiety, depressive symptoms and SOC attained statistical significance in both
BDNF Met66 carriers (in all cases P < 0.001) and non-carriers
(P = 0.036; < 0.001; < 0.001, respectively) as well as in COMT Met108/158
carriers (P = 0.004; < 0.001; < 0.001, respectively) and non-carriers (P = 0.02; 
0.01; 0.021, respectively. Changes over time in VE were not significant
(P > 0.05). The observed resistance of APOE ε4 carriers vs non-carriers to
changes in anxiety- and depressive symptoms and SOC when exposed to a stressful
environment may point to superior coping capacities of healthy young men carrying
the ε4 allele.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-020-02280-1 
PMID: 33394176 


171. Int J Ment Health Nurs. 2021 Jun;30(3):694-702. doi: 10.1111/inm.12827. Epub 2021
Jan 3.

The influence of COVID-19 on the mental health of final-year nursing students:
comparing the situation before and during the pandemic.

Reverté-Villarroya S(1), Ortega L(2)(3), Lavedán A(4)(5), Masot O(4)(5),
Burjalés-Martí MD(2), Ballester-Ferrando D(6), Fuentes-Pumarola C(6), Botigué
T(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department d'Infermeria, Facultat d'Infermeria Campus Terres de l'Ebre,
Universitat Rovira Virgili, Tortosa, Spain.
(2)Departament d'Infermeria, Facultat d'Infermeria, Universitat Rovira i Virgili,
Tarragona, Spain.
(3)Hospital Universitari Institut Pere Mata, Institut d'Investigació Sanitària
Pere Virgili (IISPV), CIBERSAM, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Reus, Spain.
(4)Nursing and Physiotherapy Department, University of Lleida, St. Lleida, Spain.
(5)Health Care Research Group (GRECS), Biomedical Research Institute of Lleida,
St. Lleida, Spain.
(6)Nursing Department, University of Girona, St. Girona, Spain.

The COVID-19 pandemic has had an important impact on the academic world. It is
known that university studies can influence the mental health of students, and
especially those studying health sciences. In this study, we therefore sought to 
analyse whether the current pandemic has affected the mental well-being of
final-year nursing students. This was a multi-centre study, with a descriptive,
longitudinal, and prospective design. Mental well-being was evaluated using the
General Health Questionnaire. A total of 305 participants were included in the
study, of whom 52.1% had experienced the COVID-19 pandemic. Statistically
significant differences were found between the two groups analysed in terms of
age, access to university, average marks, mental well-being self-esteem,
emotional exhaustion, and sense of coherence. In the case of mental well-being, a
direct association was found with both the pandemic situation (OR = 2.32,
P = 0.010) and emotional exhaustion scores (OR = 1.20, P < 0.001), while an
inverse association was found with sense of coherence scores (OR = 0.45,
P < 0.001). This study shows that the mental health of students is a significant 
factor and one that must be taken into consideration when training nursing staff 
at university. There is a need to promote healthy habits and provide appropriate 
coping strategies. It is also important to train and prepare students for
pandemic situations as these can have an important impact on the mental health of
both the members of the public who will be treated by these future nursing
professionals and the students themselves.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/inm.12827 
PMID: 33393201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Aging Med (Milton). 2020 Oct 26;3(4):252-259. doi: 10.1002/agm2.12130.
eCollection 2020 Dec.

Parkinson's family dynamics and caregiver sense of coherence: A family-systems
approach to coping in Mexico and the United States.

Villaseñor T(1)(2), Perrin PB(3)(4), Donovan EK(3), McKee GB(5)(3), Henry RS(3), 
Dzierzewski JM(3), Lageman SK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Civil Fray Antonio Alcalde Guadalajara Jalisco Mexico.
(2)Neurosciences Department University of Guadalajara Guadalajara Jalisco Mexico.
(3)Department of Psychology Virginia Commonwealth University Richmond Virginia
United States.
(4)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Virginia Commonwealth
University Richmond Virginia United States.
(5)Hunter Holmes McGuire Veterans Affairs Medical Center Mid-Atlantic Mental
Illness Research Education and Clinical Center Central Virginia VA Health Care
System Richmond Virginia United States.
(6)Department of Neurology Parkinson's & Movement Disorders Center Virginia
Commonwealth University Richmond Virginia United States.

Objective: The population of individuals with Parkinson's disease (PD) is growing
in Mexico and the United States, and there is an increasing need for family
members to provide caregiving. This study examined the connections between family
dynamics and coping, or sense of coherence, among PD caregivers in Mexico
(n = 148) and the United States (n = 105).
Methods: Caregivers completed measures of family dynamics and sense of coherence 
across indices of comprehensibility, manageability, and meaningfulness.
Results: Although caregivers in Mexico and the United States had similar levels
of sense of coherence and family dynamics reflecting strengths/adaptability and
being overwhelmed with difficulties, caregivers in Mexico had worse disrupted
communication. Family dynamics explained: 24.2% of the variance in caregiver
comprehensibility in the United States and 17.5% in Mexico; 34.1% in
manageability in the United States and 23.5% in Mexico; and 22.6% in
meaningfulness in the United States and 22.7% in Mexico (all Ps < 0.001). In both
Mexico and the United States, family strengths/adaptability uniquely predicted
caregiver comprehensibility, manageability, and meaningfulness. Being overwhelmed
with difficulties uniquely predicted comprehensibility in Mexico and
manageability and meaningfulness in the United States.
Conclusion: The development of family-systems interventions for PD caregivers to 
improve family strengths/adaptability and help families deal with difficulties
may increase caregiver coping.

© 2020 The Authors. Aging Medicine published by Beijing Hospital and John Wiley &
Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/agm2.12130 
PMCID: PMC7771559
PMID: 33392431 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest.


173. J Med Internet Res. 2020 Dec 31;22(12):e19658. doi: 10.2196/19658.

Internet-Based Support and Coaching With Complementary Clinic Visits for Young
People With Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder and Autism: Controlled
Feasibility Study.

Sehlin H(1), Hedman Ahlström B(2), Bertilsson I(3), Andersson G(4), Wentz E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Gillberg Neuropsychiatry Centre, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, University West, Trollhättan, Sweden.
(3)Habilitation & Health, Region Västra Götaland, Skövde, Sweden.
(4)Department of Behavioral Sciences and Learning, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and
Physiology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Individuals with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and 
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) can experience obstacles in traditional health
care situations due to difficulties associated with their impairment.
OBJECTIVE: This controlled study aims to investigate the feasibility of an
internet-based support and coaching intervention (IBSC), including 2 weekly chat 
sessions and 2 complementary clinic visits with coaches over the course of 8
weeks, for adolescents and young adults with ADHD and/or ASD in 2 naturalistic
routine care settings.
METHODS: Individuals with ADHD and/or ASD aged 15-32 years were recruited in 2
clinical settings, where they received either IBSC (n=24) or treatment as usual
(TAU; n=20). Outcome measures included self-report questionnaires assessing
quality of life (Manchester Short Assessment for Quality of Life), sense of
coherence (Sense Of Coherence 29), self-esteem (Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale), and
anxiety and depressive symptoms (Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale [HADS] and
Montgomery-Åsberg Depression Rating Scale-Self-reported, respectively).
RESULTS: Significant between-group effects were observed in measures of anxiety
(HADS) at postintervention (P=.02) as well as at the 6-month follow-up (P=.004). 
Significant between-group effects were also noted for depressive symptoms (HADS) 
postintervention (P=.04). The between-group effects were partially explained by a
deterioration in the TAU group. A significant increase in self-esteem (P=.04) as 
well as a decrease in anxiety (P=.003) at the 6-month follow-up was observed in
the intervention group following IBSC. Findings from a qualitative study of the
intervention are consistent with the results.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings from this study suggest that IBSC holds promise as a
feasible complement or alternative to traditional face-to-face health care
meetings.

©Helena Sehlin, Britt Hedman Ahlström, Ingrid Bertilsson, Gerhard Andersson,
Elisabet Wentz. Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet Research 
(http://www.jmir.org), 31.12.2020.

DOI: 10.2196/19658 
PMCID: PMC7808894
PMID: 33382381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Dec 21;17(24). pii: E9594. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17249594.

The Relationship between the Sense of Coherence of Dental Hygiene Students in
Their Graduation Year and Their View of the Profession and Attitude to Work: A
Cross-Sectional Survey in Japan.

Tano R(1), Miura H(2), Oshima K(3), Noritake K(4), Fukuda H(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Public Health, Wako, Saitama 351-0197, Japan.
(2)School of Dentistry, Health Sciences University of Hokkaido, Ishikari-gun,
Hokkaido 061-0293, Japan.
(3)The Nippon Dental University College at Tokyo, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-8159,
Japan.
(4)Oral Diagnosis and General Dentistry, University Hospital of Dentistry, Tokyo 
Medical and Dental University (TMDU), Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The need to make sense of coherence in placement support for student
dental hygienists has been shown. On this basis, this study investigated the
relationship between the sense of coherence of student dental hygienists and
their view of the profession and attitude to work in order to clarify how they
perceive their prospects for employment.
METHODS: The subjects were graduation-year students at all of the dental
hygienist training institutions in Japan, and anonymous, self-administered
questionnaires were sent to the institutions by post in 2019. The results were
analyzed by χ2 tests, as well as one-way analysis of variance and multiple
comparisons using Tukey's test, with the level of significance set at 5%.
RESULTS: Of 6270 questionnaires that were returned, 6264 were analyzed. The sense
of coherence (SOC) component senses were manageability (F(26,221) = 5306.06, p < 
0.01), meaningfulness (F(26,222) = 4373.48, p < 0.01), and comprehensibility
(F(26,216) = 3986.12, p < 0.01), with meaningfulness scoring significantly higher
than the other two (p < 0.01). Analysis with SOC scores divided into the low,
medium, and high groups showed a relationship between the SOC of student dental
hygienists and their view of the profession and attitude to work (p < 0.01), such
that higher SOC scores were associated with a better view of the profession and a
better attitude to work (F(26,225) = 282.18, p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that education that increases SOC in dental
hygienist training programs may positively affect future prospects for student
dental hygienists.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17249594 
PMCID: PMC7767532
PMID: 33371495  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Health Info Libr J. 2020 Dec;37(4):251-253. doi: 10.1111/hir.12350.

Sport science librarianship = health science librarianship?

Haglund L.

Does sports science librarianship differ from other aspects of health
librarianship? Or are sports science librarians more likely to identify as
generalist librarians? This editorial introduces the salutogenic approach to
sport, factors that support human health and well-being, and highlights the
challenge of resourcing the diversity of subjects covered by sports sciences.
Highlighting key parallels with medicine and public health, it concludes by
advocating for closer alignment between sports and health science librarianship.

© 2020 Health Libraries Group.

DOI: 10.1111/hir.12350 
PMID: 33369859 


176. Clin Epidemiol. 2020 Dec 17;12:1381-1388. doi: 10.2147/CLEP.S273016. eCollection 
2020.

Detection of Glaucoma and Other Vision-Threatening Ocular Diseases in the
Population Recruited at Specific Health Checkups in Japan.

Yamada M(1), Hiratsuka Y(2), Nakano T(3), Kita Y(1), Watanabe T(3), Tamura
H(4)(5), Kawasaki R(6), Yokoyama T(7), Takano S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Mitaka,
Japan.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, The Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(5)Center for Innovative Research and Education in Data Science, Institute for
Liberal Arts and Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(6)Artificial Intelligence Center for Medical Research and Application, Osaka
University Hospital, Suita, Japan.
(7)Department of Health Promotion, National Institute of Public Health, Wako,
Japan.
(8)Japan Ophthalmologist Association, Tokyo, Japan.

Background: The efficacy of vision screening for adults has not been well
established. The present study aimed to investigate the prevalence of
vision-threatening ocular diseases, including glaucoma, among subjects who
participated in specific health checkups in Japan.
Methods: This cross-sectional study included 1360 individuals who underwent
comprehensive ophthalmic examinations at 16 ophthalmology clinics located in
three municipalities. We surveyed the study participants using a questionnaire.
The participants also underwent visual acuity and refraction tests, intraocular
pressure tests, slit-lamp microscopy, fundus examinations, fundus photography,
optical coherence tomography, and static perimetry.
Results: The mean age of the subjects was 63.7 ± 8.7 years (range, 40-74 years). 
Among the 1360 participants, 168 (12.4%) were diagnosed with glaucoma and 33
(2.4%) with preperimetric glaucoma. Cataracts were seen in 741 participants
(54.5%), and 77 (5.7%) were diagnosed with clinically significant cataracts.
Retinal diseases included macular degeneration (1.2%), diabetic retinopathy
(1.0%), chorioretinal atrophy (0.5%), macular epiretinal membrane (2.9%), branch 
retinal vein occlusion (0.7%), and others (2.0%). Regarding the type of glaucoma,
93.5% of participants with glaucoma were diagnosed with open-angle glaucoma in a 
broad sense (81.0% with normal-tension glaucoma and 12.5% with primary open-angle
glaucoma). Multivariate analysis showed that male sex, age, systemic
comorbidities, and myopia were significant risk factors for open-angle glaucoma.
Conclusion: Many adults with ocular diseases were screened by ophthalmic
checkups. The addition of simultaneous ophthalmic checkups to specific health
checkups could be an effective measure for the prevention of visual impairment in
the older population.

© 2020 Yamada et al.

DOI: 10.2147/CLEP.S273016 
PMCID: PMC7751581
PMID: 33364847 

Conflict of interest statement: Professor Masakazu Yamada reports grants from the
Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, Japan, during the conduct of the study;
personal fees from Santen Pharmaceutical Co., Senju Pharmaceutical Co., Otsuka
Pharmaceutical Co., and Johnson & Johnson Vision Care; grants, personal fees from
Alcon Japan Co., outside the submitted work. Dr Yoshimune Hiratsuka reports
grants from the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, Japan, outside the
submitted work. Professor Hiroshi Tamura reports grants from Findex, during the
conduct of the study; lecture fees from Novartis, outside the submitted work.
Professor Ryo Kawasaki reports grants from Ministry of Health, Labor, and
Welfare, Japan, during the conduct of the study; is part of the Endowed
Department for Topcon, outside the submitted work. Professor Tetsuji Yokoyama
reports grants from the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, Japan, during the 
conduct of the study. Dr Shigeru Takano reports grants from the Ministry of
Health, Labor and Welfare, Japan, during the conduct of the study. The authors
have no other competing interests, including relevant financial interests,
activities, and affiliations in this work.


177. BMC Nurs. 2020 Dec 20;19(1):125. doi: 10.1186/s12912-020-00521-y.

Salutary factors and hospital work environments: a qualitative descriptive study 
of nurses in Sweden.

Nunstedt H(1), Eriksson M(2), Obeid A(2), Hillström L(2), Truong A(2), Pennbrant 
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University West, Trollhättan, Sweden.
hakan.nunstedt@hv.se.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, University West, Trollhättan, Sweden.

Erratum in
    BMC Nurs. 2021 Jan 21;20(1):25.

BACKGROUND: Extensive research describes how nurses experience their work
environment. The conditions are described as stressful and dissatisfying with
nurses intending to leave their workplace. Knowledge about the personal
perception regarding why nurses consider leaving the hospital workplace is
limited. The purpose of this study was to understand why hospital nurses remain
in their workplace, which facilitates their continuation in the profession.
OBJECTIVE: The objective was to explore and describe factors explaining why
hospital nurses remain in the workplace.
METHODS: This was a descriptive qualitative study with a purposive sample of
hospital nurses in Sweden. The salutogenic theory was the basis for the interview
guide and the semi-structured questions. Individual interviews were conducted in 
a hospital in western Sweden. Content analysis was performed to organize the
coded data according to the sense of coherence.
RESULTS: Data saturation was achieved with 12 interviews. Within the three themes
of coherence (comprehensibility, manageability, and meaningfulness), ten
subthemes were categorized from the data as follows: job satisfaction and fun at 
work, acknowledgement and productivity, togetherness and team security,
manageable workload, variable work and challenging situations, workplace and
personal space balance, collaboration and supportive leadership, valued role and 
good work, commitment and involvement, and pride in the professional role.
CONCLUSIONS: The main findings of this study have shown the critical importance
of being in a meaningful, comprehensible and manageable work context that
supports nurses in maintaining their professional identity.

DOI: 10.1186/s12912-020-00521-y 
PMCID: PMC7751112
PMID: 33342433 


178. Nutr Rev. 2020 Dec 18. pii: nuaa129. doi: 10.1093/nutrit/nuaa129. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Cruciferous vegetables: rationale for exploring potential salutary effects of
sulforaphane-rich foods in patients with chronic kidney disease.

Cardozo LFMF(1), Alvarenga LA(1), Ribeiro M(1), Dai L(1), Shiels PG(1),
Stenvinkel P(1), Lindholm B(1), Mafra D(1).

Author information: 
(1)L.F.M.F. Cardozo and D. Mafra are with the Graduate Program in Cardiovascular 
Sciences, Fluminense Federal University, Niterói, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. L.A.
Alvarenga and D. Mafra are with the Graduate Program in Medical Sciences,
Fluminense Federal University, Niterói, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. M. Ribeiro and D.
Mafra are with the Graduate Program in Nutrition Sciences, Fluminense Federal
University, Niterói, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. L. Dai, P. Stenvinkel and B.
Lindholm are with the Division of Renal Medicine and Baxter Novum, Department of 
Clinical Science, Technology and Intervention, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden. P.G. Shiels is with Wolfson Wohl Translational Research Centre, Institute
of Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland.

Sulforaphane (SFN) is a sulfur-containing isothiocyanate found in cruciferous
vegetables (Brassicaceae) and a well-known activator of nuclear factor-erythroid 
2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), considered a master regulator of cellular antioxidant 
responses. Patients with chronic diseases, such as diabetes, cardiovascular
disease, cancer, and chronic kidney disease (CKD) present with high levels of
oxidative stress and a massive inflammatory burden associated with diminished
Nrf2 and elevated nuclear transcription factor-κB-κB expression. Because it is a 
common constituent of dietary vegetables, the salutogenic properties of
sulforaphane, especially it's antioxidative and anti-inflammatory properties,
have been explored as a nutritional intervention in a range of diseases of
ageing, though data on CKD remain scarce. In this brief review, the effects of
SFN as a senotherapeutic agent are described and a rationale is provided for
studies that aim to explore the potential benefits of SFN-rich foods in patients 
with CKD.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
International Life Sciences Institute. All rights reserved. For permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/nutrit/nuaa129 
PMID: 33338213 


179. Front Psychiatry. 2020 Nov 24;11:599039. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.599039.
eCollection 2020.

Masculinity and Help-Seeking Among Men With Depression: A Qualitative Study.

Staiger T(1), Stiawa M(1), Mueller-Stierlin AS(1), Kilian R(1), Beschoner P(2),
Gündel H(2), Becker T(1), Frasch K(1)(3), Panzirsch M(3), Schmauß M(4), Krumm
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry II, University of Ulm and District Hospital Günzburg,
Ulm, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University Hospital
Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, District Hospital 
Donauwörth, Donauwörth, Germany.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, University of
Augsburg and District Hospital Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany.

Background: Many studies indicate that men are more reluctant to seek help for
mental health problems than women. Traditional ideas of masculinity are often
seen as a cause of this phenomenon. However, little is known about the diversity 
of experiences during the processes of help-seeking and service use among men
with depression who have already utilized mental health services. This study aims
to explore men's experiences and attitudes toward depression, help-seeking, and
service use in order to develop gender-sensitive services. Methods:
Narrative-biographical interviews were conducted with men treated for depression 
(n = 12). Interview topics included individual experience with depression,
help-seeking behavior, and mental health service use. Transcripts were analyzed
using qualitative content analysis. Results: Before seeking treatment, men's
help-seeking behavior was negatively affected by internalized masculine norms.
However, findings indicate a change of attitudes toward depression after mental
health service use. Men with depression emphasized a salutogenic perspective
toward mental health problems and critically reflected on masculine norms. The
positive function of men-only groups were described as key for successful service
use. Conclusions: Men with depression reported experiences toward help-seeking
and service use on four different levels: (i) attitudes toward depression, (ii)
perception of societal views on depression, (iii) experiences within the family
context and (iv) experiences with mental health services. Interventions to reduce
the stigma of being "unmanly" and to improve men's capacity to cope with being
unable to work should be developed. Peer-led men-only groups may increase
participants' self-esteem and assist in disclosing weaknesses. In the context of 
GPs' mediating role, training for health professionals concerning the impact of
masculine norms on mental health is recommended.

Copyright © 2020 Staiger, Stiawa, Mueller-Stierlin, Kilian, Beschoner, Gündel,
Becker, Frasch, Panzirsch, Schmauß and Krumm.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.599039 
PMCID: PMC7732518
PMID: 33329149 


180. Prim Health Care Res Dev. 2020 Dec 17;21:e65. doi: 10.1017/S1463423620000614.

Is it possible to gain energy at work? A questionnaire study in primary health
care.

Ejlertsson L(1), Heijbel B(1), Brorsson A(1), Andersson HI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences in Malmö, Lund
University, Malmö, Sweden.
(2)Faculty of Health Science, Kristianstad University, Kristianstad, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: The area of regenerative work is still close to unexplored. The aim
was to explore the possibility for employees to gain energy at work.
METHODS: Questionnaire to all employees (n = 599) from different professions in
public and private primary health care centers in one health care district in
Sweden. The questionnaire, which had a salutogenic perspective, included
information on self-rated health, psychosocial work environment and experiences, 
recovery, social climate, and energy. Having an energy-building experience was
defined by a positive response to two combined questions regarding energy at
work. Analyses were performed with bivariate correlation and multiple logistic
regression.
RESULTS: The response rate was 84%. Health and energy correlated positively (r = 
0.54). In total, 44.5% of the employees reported having an energy-building
experience. Predictors for having an energy-building experience were recovery
[positive odds ratio (POR) = 2.78], autonomy (POR = 2.26), positive workplace
characteristics (POR = 2.09), and internal work experiences (POR = 1.88).
CONCLUSIONS: The results support the hypothesis that it is possible to gain
energy at work, an area that is still close to unexplored. There is a high
correlation between energy and health. Employees' energy-building experiences
relate to well-being at work and correlates to recovery, autonomy, positive
workplace characteristics, and positive internal work experiences. This knowledge
can help in improving future work environment development.

DOI: 10.1017/S1463423620000614 
PMCID: PMC7801927
PMID: 33327974 


181. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Dec 14;17(24). pii: E9362. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17249362.

Changes in Physical Activity, Sitting and Sleep across the COVID-19 National
Lockdown Period in Scotland.

Janssen X(1), Fleming L(1), Kirk A(1), Rollins L(1), Young D(2), Grealy M(1),
MacDonald B(1), Flowers P(1), Williams L(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychological Sciences and Health, University of Strathclyde,
Glasgow G11XP, UK.
(2)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow
G11XH, UK.

We examine the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak and concomitant restrictions
(i.e., lockdown) on 24-hour movement behaviors (i.e., physical activity, sitting,
sleep) in a purposive sample of people (n = 3230) reporting change recruited
online. Participants' self-reported time spent in moderate-to-vigorous physical
activity (MVPA), walking, sitting and sleep prior to lockdown (T1), during the
first national lockdown (T2) and as restrictions initially started to ease (T3). 
For each 24-hour movement behavior, category-shifts are reported (positive,
negative or did not change), as well as the percentage of participants recording 
positive/negative changes across clusters of behaviors and the percentage of
participants recording improvement or maintenance of change across time. From T1 
to T2 walking decreased, whereas MVPA, sitting and sleep increased, from T2 to T3
levels returned to pre-lockdown for all but MVPA. Participants who changed one
behavior positively were more likely to report a positive change in another and
50% of those who reported positive changes from T1 to T2 maintained or improved
further when restrictions started to ease. The current study showed that a large 
proportion of the sample reported positive changes, most notably those displaying
initially poor levels of each behavior. These findings will inform salutogenic
intervention development.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17249362 
PMCID: PMC7765067
PMID: 33327556  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Work. 2020;67(4):939-947. doi: 10.3233/WOR-203344.

Evaluation of mood, stress levels and sense of coherence in future
physiotherapists.

Kowalska J(1), Pawik M(1), Wójtowicz D(1), Szczepańska-Gieracha J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiotherapy, University School of Physical Education, Wroclaw,
Poland.

Erratum in
    Work. 2021;68(2):519.

BACKGROUND: Researchers suggest that physiotherapists are highly exposed to both 
the physical and the mental strains.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess mood and the level of stress as
well as a sense of coherence among future physiotherapists studying at the
Department of Physiotherapy.
METHODS: The study included 249 students, 181 women and 68 men. The Beck
Depression Inventory (BDI), the Sense of Coherence Questionnaire (SOC-29) and the
Perceived Stress Questionnaire (PSQ) were used.
RESULTS: The examined group had an average level of sense of coherence and a low 
level of stress. One out of four students exhibited mood disorders. The factors
associated with the prevalence of mood disorders among studied students were as
follows: female (gender), lack of regular physical activity, poor financial
situation, lack of friend to talk to in case of problems, dissatisfaction with
the chosen field of study, and being inadequately prepared to work as a
physiotherapist.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the study indicate an increased prevalence of mood
disorders among students of physiotherapy. It is suggested that this situation
may require the implementation of effective psychoprophylactic activities during 
the course of studies and broadly understood education about the psychophysical
wellbeing of students, especially as they will work in an environment that
requires high resistance to stress and support for other people in a crisis
situation.

DOI: 10.3233/WOR-203344 
PMID: 33325440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Can J Diet Pract Res. 2021 Jun 1;82(2):68-74. doi: 10.3148/cjdpr-2020-032. Epub
2020 Dec 15.

"It was Like Magic": Relationships Supporting Compassion, Creativity, and Sense
of Coherence in Nutrition Students.

Fraser K MScAHN(1), Brady J PhD(1), Lordly D EdD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Human Nutrition, Mount Saint Vincent University,
Halifax, NS.

The purpose of this exploratory research was to understand the experiences and
learnings of dietetic and nutrition students following a 3-week intensive summer 
course designed to enhance students' understandings of compassion, creativity,
and sense of coherence as they apply to personal growth and socially just
professional practice. Seven of 15 students participated in one-on-one,
semi-structured interviews. Data analysis was conducted using inductive thematic 
analysis, resulting in 3 meta-themes: (i) personal meaning and sense making, (ii)
relational and power dynamics, and (iii) disruption; participants contextualized 
these themes via a dynamic interplay within and among the domains of self,
pedagogy, and practice. As a result of taking this course, participants developed
an enhanced sense of coherence, self-compassion, well-being, and a more
equity-focused understanding of health. Student development may have been
achieved through attending to student experience and a relational pedagogical
epistemology that allowed students to make personal, interpersonal, and systemic 
connections among their own subjective experiences, the experiences of peers, and
broader social impacts on health. Given nutrition classrooms are largely
positivist, it is important to consider how these environments as relational
contexts may support or undermine compassion, sense of coherence, and ultimately 
the health and well-being of students.

DOI: 10.3148/cjdpr-2020-032 
PMID: 33320792 


184. Issues Ment Health Nurs. 2020 Dec 15:1-13. doi: 10.1080/01612840.2020.1852458.
[Epub ahead of print]

Development and Effect of a Salutogenic Program for Rural Elderly Women on
Depression and Suicidal Ideation.

Oh HJ(1), Gang M(2), Kim MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Nursing Department, Daejeon Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon,
South Korea.
(2)College of Nursing, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, South Korea.
(3)Department of Nursing Science, Howon University, Gunsan, South Korea.

This study aimed to develop and evaluate the effects of a Salutogenic program on 
sense of coherence, depression, and suicidal ideation among rural older adults.
Quasi-experimental, nonequivalent control group pretest-posttest design was used.
Participants were female, aged 65 years and older from G and O province, South
Korea. The experimental group (n = 22) received a 12-session Salutogenic program 
for 6 weeks, twice a week. The control group (n = 19) was put on a waiting list
to receive the intervention after completing the study. Collected data were
analyzed using descriptive statistics, a χ2 test, independent t-test, and
repeated measure ANOVA with SPSS WIN 26.0. There were significant differences in 
sense of coherence (F = 19.34, p < .001), depression (F = 12.93, p < .001), and
suicidal ideation (F = 4.40, p = .027) over time pretest, posttest, and follow-up
test after intervention between two groups. The study discussed the effect of
Salutogenic program on sense of coherence, depression, and suicidal ideation, and
considered its benefits in suicide prevention for elderly women. The Salutogenic 
program can be recommended as useful strategies to enhance sense of coherence and
to reduce depression and suicidal ideation of elderly women in community.

DOI: 10.1080/01612840.2020.1852458 
PMID: 33320727 


185. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Dec 9;17(24). pii: E9201. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17249201.

Insights Gained in the Aftermath of the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Follow-Up Survey of 
a Recreational Training Program, Focusing on Sense of Coherence and Sleep
Quality.

Szovák E(1), Varga K(2), Pelyva IZ(1), Soós R(1), Jeges S(1), Kívés Z(3), Tóth
ÁL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Doctoral School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of 
Pécs, H-7621 Pécs, Hungary.
(2)Sociological Institute, Pázmány Péter Catholic University, H-2087 Piliscsaba, 
Hungary.
(3)Institute for Health Insurance, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Pécs, H-7621 Pécs, Hungary.
(4)Institute of Sport Sciences and Physical Education, Faculty of Science,
University of Pécs, H-7624 Pécs, Hungary.

The original aim of this study was a follow-up assessment of a recreational
program running for six months (September 2019-February 2020) within controlled
conditions. Following the arrival of the COVID-19 pandemic, the survey acquired a
new goal: how do the subjects of the follow-up sampling experience this severe
stress situation, and in this experience, what role does physical activity and a 
salutogenetic sense of coherence play. Austrian women (N = 53) took part in the
training program, whose physical condition was assessed before the start of the
program, then reassessed after three months and after six months; the organizers 
also had them fill out the sense of coherence questionnaire (SOC) as well as the 
Regensburger insomnia scale. After the lifting of the lockdown introduced due to 
the pandemic, participants completed an online survey relating to their changed
life conditions, physical activities, sense of coherence and sleep quality.
Results: After the first three months of the training, no significant changes
were detected. After six months, the participants SOC and sleep quality improved 
(Friedman test: p = 0.005 and p < 0.001). During the lockdown, sleep quality
generally deteriorated (W-rank test: p = 0.001), while SOC did not change. The
women in possession of a relatively stronger SOC continued the training (OR =
3.6, CI 95% = 1.2-12.2), and their sleep quality deteriorated to a lesser degree.
(OR = 1.7, CI 95% = 1.1-2.8). Conclusion: The data reinforce the interdependency 
between physical exercise (PE) and SOC; furthermore, the personal training that
the authors formulated for middle-aged women proved to be successful in
strengthening their sense of coherence, and it also reduced the deterioration in 
sleep quality due to stress.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17249201 
PMCID: PMC7763267
PMID: 33317102  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Dec 9;17(24). pii: E9185. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17249185.

Work Ability among Upper-Secondary School Teachers: Examining the Role of
Burnout, Sense of Coherence, and Work-Related and Lifestyle Factors.

Hlaďo P(1), Dosedlová J(1), Harvánková K(1), Novotný P(1), Gottfried J(2), Rečka 
K(2), Petrovová M(1)(3), Pokorný B(1)(4), Štorová I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Arts, Masaryk University, 602 00 Brno, Czech Republic.
(2)Faculty of Social Sciences, Masaryk University, 602 00 Brno, Czech Republic.
(3)Employee Preventive Care Clinic, Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, 656 53
Brno, Czech Republic.
(4)Age Management z.s., Orlí 27, 602 00 Brno, Czech Republic.

Maintaining and promoting teachers' work ability is essential for increasing
productivity and preventing early exit from the teaching profession. This study
aimed to identify the predictors of work ability among upper-secondary school
teachers and examine the mediating role of burnout. A large and diverse group of 
Czech upper-secondary school teachers was surveyed to address this goal. The
sample comprised 531 upper-secondary school teachers (50.0 ± 9.94 years, 19.9 ±
10.62 in the teaching profession, 57.6% females). Relatively greater empirical
support was found for the effects of burnout, sense of coherence, work-life
balance, and perceived relationships in the school environment on work ability
than for the impact of age, homeroom teacher duties, workload, and caring for
elderly relatives. Furthermore, burnout served as an important mediator of the
relationship between sense of coherence and work ability. Teachers with a higher 
sense of coherence are thus better able to cope with adverse work circumstances
and identify and mobilize internal and external resources to prevent professional
exhaustion and the subsequent decline in work ability. The study can guide
interventions on the work ability of teachers.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17249185 
PMCID: PMC7763596
PMID: 33316934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Birth. 2021 Mar;48(1):104-113. doi: 10.1111/birt.12521. Epub 2020 Dec 11.

Relationships and trust: Two key pillars of a well-functioning freestanding
midwifery unit.

Rocca-Ihenacho L(1), Yuill C(1), McCourt C(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, Centre for Maternal and Child Health Research,
City, University of London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Despite strong evidence supporting the expansion of midwife-led unit 
provision, as a result of optimal maternal and perinatal outcomes,
cost-effectiveness, and positive service user and staff experiences, scaling-up
has been slow. Systemic barriers associated with gender, professional, economic, 
cultural, and social factors continue to constrain the expansion of midwifery as 
a public health intervention globally. This article aimed to explore
relationships and trust as key components of a well-functioning freestanding
midwifery unit (FMU).
METHOD(S): A critical realist ethnographic study of an FMU located in East
London, England, was conducted over a period of 15 months. Recruitment of the 82 
participants was purposive. Data collection included participant observation and 
semi-structured interviews, and data were analyzed thematically along with
relevant local guidelines and documents.
RESULTS: Twelve themes emerged. Relationships and Trust were identified as a core
theme. The other 11 themes were grouped into six families, three of which:
Ownership, Autonomy, and Continuous Learning; Team Spirit, Interdependency, and
Power Relations; and Salutogenesis will be covered in this paper. The remaining
three families: Friendly Environment; Having Time and Mindfulness; and Social
Capital, will be covered in a separate paper.
CONCLUSIONS: A relationship-based model of care was crucial for both the
functioning of the FMU and service users' satisfaction and may offer a compelling
response to high levels of stress and burnout among midwives.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/birt.12521 
PMID: 33314346 


188. Diabet Med. 2021 Mar;38(3):e14495. doi: 10.1111/dme.14495. Epub 2020 Dec 30.

A systematic review of illness perception interventions in type 2 diabetes:
Effects on glycaemic control and illness perceptions.

Alyami M(1), Serlachius A(1), O'Donovan CE(1), van der Werf B(2), Broadbent E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological Medicine, University of Auckland, Auckland, New
Zealand.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Population Health,
Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New
Zealand.

AIMS: This systematic review sought to synthesize the evidence regarding the
effectiveness of illness perception interventions compared with control
conditions at changing illness perceptions and improving glycaemic control in
individuals with type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: Seven electronic databases were searched between October 2018 and May
2020. Randomized controlled trials that tested interventions informed by the
Common-Sense Model in adults with type 2 diabetes, and measured illness
perceptions and glycaemic control at pre- and post-intervention were included.
The Cochrane risk of bias tool was used to assess risk of bias.
RESULTS: A total of 4095 articles were identified, of which nine randomized
control trials (2561 participants) across 12 publications were included in this
review. Findings showed that all the illness perception domains were modified in 
at least one trial, with the exception of cyclical timeline perceptions.
Coherence, personal control, treatment control and chronic timeline perceptions
were the most frequently modified perceptions. Glycaemic control demonstrated an 
improvement in the intervention group compared to the control group at 3 and
6 months post-intervention in two trials. Risk of bias assessment showed high
risk of bias especially for the blinding of participants and the personnel
domain.
CONCLUSIONS: There is limited evidence that interventions informed by the
Common-Sense Model can improve glycaemic control in individuals with type 2
diabetes through changing inaccurate illness perceptions. Recommendations for
future research are to tailor intervention content based on baseline perceptions,
measure the emotional and causal domains, and involve family members in the
intervention. (PROSPERO registration: CRD42019114532).

© 2020 Diabetes UK.

DOI: 10.1111/dme.14495 
PMID: 33306203 


189. BMC Psychol. 2020 Dec 10;8(1):131. doi: 10.1186/s40359-020-00493-3.

The relationship between resilience and loneliness elucidated by a Danish version
of the resilience scale for adults.

Jakobsen IS(1), Madsen LMR(1), Mau M(2)(3)(4), Hjemdal O(5), Friborg O(6).

Author information: 
(1)Health, Social Work and Welfare Research, UCL University College, Odense,
Denmark.
(2)Health, Social Work and Welfare Research, UCL University College, Odense,
Denmark. mama@ucl.dk.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
mama@ucl.dk.
(4)Health Sciences Research Centre, UCL University College, Odense, Denmark.
mama@ucl.dk.
(5)Department of Psychology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
Trondheim, Norway.
(6)Department of Psychology, UiT The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Research on the relationship between resilience and loneliness is
sparse. The construct of resilience has been conceptualized in multiple ways,
including the measurement of resilience. The Resilience Scale for Adults (RSA) is
a measure of protective factors. The present study examined whether resiliency
moderates any negative relationship between loneliness and mental health and
additionally examined the psychometric properties of the Danish translation of
the RSA.
METHODS: A Danish sample (N = 422) completed the UCLA Loneliness Scale, Hopkins
Symptom Check List-25 (HSCL-25), the Sense of Coherence (SOC-13), and the RSA,
Resilience Scale for Adults.
RESULTS: The measure of loneliness correlated significantly and negatively with
most facets of the RSA, except the subscales of family cohesion and structured
style. The strongest correlation was the negative one between loneliness and SOC.
The results indicated that people feeling lonely also experience their life as
less meaningful.
CONCLUSION: The study supports the existing six-factor structure of the
Resilience Scale for Adults (RSA) in a Danish sample. The results indicate that
all facets of resiliency were negatively related to loneliness. Also, the facets 
of perception of self and family coherence could explain a substantial amount of 
the variance associated with symptoms of depression in relation to loneliness.

DOI: 10.1186/s40359-020-00493-3 
PMCID: PMC7727155
PMID: 33303037  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Dec 4;17(23). pii: E9064. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17239064.

Can Physiological and Psychological Factors Predict Dropout from Intense 10-Day
Winter Military Survival Training?

Vaara JP(1), Eränen L(2), Ojanen T(2), Pihlainen K(3), Nykänen T(4), Kallinen
K(2), Heikkinen R(5), Kyröläinen H(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leadership and Military Pedagogy, National Defence University,
P.O. Box 7, 00861 Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Finnish Defence Research Agency, Finnish Defence Forces, P.O. Box 5, 04401
Järvenpää, Finland.
(3)Personnel Division of Defence Command, P.O. Box 919, 00130 Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Army Academy, 53600 Lappeenranta, Finland.
(5)Statistical Analysis Services, Analyysitoimisto Statisti Oy, 40720 Jyväskylä, 
Finland.
(6)Faculty of Sport and Health Sciences, University of Jyväskylä, P.O. Box 35,
40114 Jyväskylä, Finland.

Background: In the military context, high levels of physiological and
psychological stress together can compromise individual's ability to complete
given duty or mission and increase dropout rates. The purpose of this study was
to investigate if baseline physical fitness, body composition, hormonal and
psychological factors could predict dropout from a 10-day intense winter military
survival training. Methods: 69 conscripts volunteered to participate in the
study. Physical fitness (muscle strength and power, muscle endurance, and aerobic
fitness), body composition and hormonal variables (BDNF, testosterone, cortisol, 
SHBG, DHEAS, IGF-1) together with self-reported psychological factors (short five
personality, hardiness, sense of coherence, stress, depression) were assessed
prior the survival training. Results: During the survival training, 20 conscripts
(29%) dropped out. Baseline aerobic fitness (hazard ratio, HR: 0.997, 95% CI:
0.994-0.999, p = 0.006) and serum cortisol (HR: 1.0006, 95% CI: 1.001-1.011, p = 
0.017) predicted dropout in Cox regression model. Each 10 m increase in the 12
min running test decreased the risk for dropout by 3%. Conclusion: Although most 
of the physiological and psychological variables at the baseline did not predict 
dropout during a short-term winter survival military training, baseline
information of aerobic fitness and serum cortisol concentration may be useful to 
target support for individuals at higher potential risk for dropout.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17239064 
PMCID: PMC7731046
PMID: 33291711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Dec 5;17(23). pii: E9095. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17239095.

The Restorative Potential of Icelandic Nature.

Kristjánsdóttir HL(1), Sigurðardóttir S(2), Pálsdóttir AM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Vocational Rehabilitation Center of the Westfjords, 400 Ísafjörður, Iceland.
(2)Faculty of Graduate Studies in Health Sciences, University of Akureyri, 600
Akureyri, Iceland.
(3)Department of Work Science, Business Economics and Environmental Psychology,
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, P.O. Box 88, SE-230 53 Alnarp,
Sweden.

This study aimed to investigate if proposed restorative attributes according to
attention restoration theory and supportive environment theory could be
experienced and identified in Icelandic landscape and contribute to a restorative
experience in nature sites in rural Iceland. A prospective mixed-method study was
conducted over the period of one year. Seven different nature sites that were
considered likely to have restorative qualities were selected for the evaluation 
i.e., three forest sites, three seashores, and one park in and in the vicinity of
Ísafjör&eth;ur, Iceland. Each site was evaluated regarding how the participants
experienced its restorative qualities and how a stay therein affected their
mental state. Nature visits were offered once a week, where the participants
visited one of the seven locations for two hours. The findings show that the
participants perceived and experienced nature sites as having the characteristics
of a restorative environment and that staying at the nature sites positively
affected their mental state. External conditions, like weather, which can affect 
nature visits, were rarely a hinderance. Thus, it can be concluded that numerous 
coastal areas, forests, and parks in Iceland, especially in rural areas, might
possess restorative qualities as well. This result shows that wild and open
nature in North West Iceland has the characteristics of a restorative environment
and can be utilized for health promotion.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17239095 
PMCID: PMC7730928
PMID: 33291500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Complement Med Res. 2021;28(3):252-262. doi: 10.1159/000512333. Epub 2020 Dec 7.

Meditation-Based Lifestyle Modification: Development of an Integrative Mind-Body 
Program for Mental Health and Human Flourishing.

Bringmann HC(1)(2), Bringmann N(3), Jeitler M(4)(5), Brunnhuber S(3), Michalsen
A(4)(5), Sedlmeier P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Social Medicine, Epidemiology, and Health Economics,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin,
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany, 
holger.bringmann@charite.de.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics, and Psychotherapy, Diakonie Kliniken
Zschadraß, Colditz, Germany, holger.bringmann@charite.de.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics, and Psychotherapy, Diakonie Kliniken
Zschadraß, Colditz, Germany.
(4)Institute for Social Medicine, Epidemiology, and Health Economics,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin,
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Department of Internal and Integrative Medicine, Immanuel Hospital, Berlin,
Germany.
(6)Institute of Psychology, Chemnitz University of Technology, Chemnitz, Germany.

Mental disorders are a core health challenge in the 21st century. Integrative
mental health care takes an individual, lifestyle-modifying, salutogenic
approach, combining somatic, psychosocial, and spiritual perspectives from
evidence-based conventional and complementary medicine. In particular, meditation
and mindfulness have received growing research interest in the last decade. In
this article, we present Meditation-Based Lifestyle Modification (MBLM), a new,
complex mind-body intervention for mental health care. It is the first program to
intensify meditation practice using classical yoga. The program (a) covers all
areas of classical yoga, (b) considers ethical and spiritual aspects of daily
life, (c) orients participants toward sustained lifestyle modification, and (d)
is applicable in a clinical context. The scientific rationale of the program is
outlined in this article, based on the Criteria for Reporting the Development and
Evaluation of Complex Interventions in Healthcare. Further research is planned to
show the clinical feasibility of MBLM and evaluate its efficacy, processes of
change, and cost-effectiveness.

Publisher: Psychische Störungen stellen eine der zentralen gesundheitlichen
Herausforderungen des 21. Jahrhunderts dar. Eine integrative medizinische
Versorgung bietet individuelle, salutogenetische und auf eine Veränderung des
Le­bensstils ausgerichtete Ansätze, in der somatische, psychosoziale und
spirituelle Perspektiven aus der evidenzbasierten Schul- und Komplementärmedizin 
vereint werden. Dabei haben Meditation und achtsamkeitsbasierte Verfahren
insbesondere im letzten Jahrzehnt ein wachsendes Forschungsinteresse erfahren.
Die meditationsbasierte Lebensstilmodifikation (MBLM) ist eine neue, komplexe
Mind-Body-Intervention für die Versorgung im Bereich seelischer Gesundheit. Es
ist das erste Therapieprogramm, das Meditation durch die Praxis klassischen Yogas
intensiviert. Das Programm umfasst (a) alle wesentlichen Bereiche des klassischen
Yogas, (b) berücksichtigt insbesondere ethische und spirituelle Aspekte im
täglichen Leben, (c) richtet die Teilnehmer auf eine nachhaltige Veränderung des 
Lebensstils aus und (d) ist im klinischen Kontext anwendbar. Der
wissenschaftliche Hintergrund von MBLM wird in diesem Artikel anhand der
Kriterien für die Berichterstattung über die Entwicklung und Bewertung komplexer 
Interventionen im Gesundheitswesen erläutert. Weitere Forschungsarbeiten zu MBLM 
sind geplant, um die Durchführbarkeit im klini­schen Kontext zu erforschen und
die Wirksamkeit, Veränderungsprozesse und Kostenwirksamkeit zu bewerten.
© 2020 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000512333 
PMID: 33285545 


193. J Educ Health Promot. 2020 Oct 30;9:261. doi: 10.4103/jehp.jehp_46_20.
eCollection 2020.

Relationship between fear of childbirth and the sense of cohesion with the
attachment of pregnant mothers to the fetus.

Golmakani N(1), Gholami M(2), Shaghaghi F(3), Safinejad H(4), Kamali Z(2),
Mohebbi-Dehnavi Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Degree, Nursing and Midwifery Care Research Center, Mashhad
University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(2)Department of Midwifery, Neyshabur University of Medical Sciences, Neyshabur, 
Iran.
(3)Department of Midwifery, Faculty of Medicine, Social Development and Health
Promotion Research Center, Gonabad University of Medical Sciences, Gonabad, Iran.
(4)Midwifery Faculty, Kerman Branch, Islamic Azad University, Kerman, Iran.
(5)PhD Candidate in Reproductive Health, Department of Midwifery and Reproductive
Health, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, 
Isfahan, Iran.

INTRODUCTION: Maternal-fetal attachment is a term used to describe the emotional 
relationship that a pregnant woman has with her developing fetus. Mental care for
pregnant women (fear of childbirth and a sense of cohesion of pregnant women) is 
one of the most important aspects of prenatal care that affects the mother's
attachment to the fetus. If fear and anxiety are relieved, psychological and
physical relaxation will be replaced. Therefore, the present study was conducted 
with the aim of determining the relationship between fear of childbirth and the
sense of cohesion with the attachment of pregnant mothers to the fetus.
METHODS: The present study is a descriptive study that was performed by
multi-stage sampling method on 500 pregnant mothers who referred to health
centers in Isfahan in 2017. The study participants completed the following
questionnaires: fear of childbirth, sense of cohesion, and mother's attachment to
the fetus. The data were analyzed by descriptive and analytical statistical
methods (Pearson correlation) using SPSS software version 22.
RESULTS: The results showed that there was a significant negative relationship
between the overall score of maternal attachment to the fetus and fear of
childbirth (r = -0.153, P = 0.001). However, there is a significant positive
relationship between the overall score of maternal attachment to the fetus and
the sense of cohesion (r = 0.112, P = 0.01). The results also showed a
significant negative relationship between the fear of childbirth and the
dimensions of maternal attachment to the fetus, including interaction with the
fetus (P = 0.04), self-sacrifice (P = 0.04), and attributing characteristics to
the fetus (P = 0.05). There was a positive and significant relationship between
the sense of coherence and the subsequent acceptance of the maternal role of
maternal attachment to the fetus (P = 0.004).
CONCLUSION: More attention of prenatal care provider to the psychological issues 
of the pregnant mother and their fears and worries can lead to appropriate
interventions in this field, and as a result, mothers' attachment to their fetus 
has increased so that they can take proper care during and after pregnancy.

Copyright: © 2020 Journal of Education and Health Promotion.

DOI: 10.4103/jehp.jehp_46_20 
PMCID: PMC7709774
PMID: 33282966 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


194. J Clin Periodontol. 2021 Feb;48(2):226-236. doi: 10.1111/jcpe.13405. Epub 2020
Dec 15.

Periodontal treatment, psychological factors and oral health-related quality of
life.

Rawlinson A(1), Vettore MV(2), Baker SR(1), Robinson PG(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Dentistry, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(2)Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(3)Bristol Dental School, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.

Comment in
    Br Dent J. 2021 Jan;230(2):92.

AIMS: To determine changes in OHRQoL and clinical status after periodontal
treatment and the factors predicting these changes.
METHODS: Cohort of 140 patients with chronic periodontitis receiving non-surgical
treatment. Participant self-completed questionnaires: Sense of Coherence, Locus
of Control, Self-esteem and Task-specific Self-efficacy before treatment, and
Oral Health Impact Profile at treatment, oral hygiene review and end of study.
Relationships between OHRQoL, clinical data, individual and environmental
characteristics were analysed with structural equation modelling guided by the
Wilson and Cleary model.
RESULTS: OHRQoL and the periodontal status improved after treatment. Greater
sense of coherence and age, better periodontal status, lower DMFT and being male 
predicted better OHRQoL after treatment. Better task-specific self-efficacy and
self-esteem, but worse plaque score predicted better end periodontal status.
CONCLUSIONS: OHRQoL and periodontal status improved after periodontal treatment, 
and this was predicted by individual demographic and psychological factors. These
factors may assist with case selection and as possible points for intervention to
improve clinical and subjective outcomes of periodontal treatment.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcpe.13405 
PMID: 33263182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn. 2020 Nov 30. doi: 10.1037/xlm0000936. [Epub ahead
of print]

Recovery from misinterpretations during online sentence processing.

Blott LM(1), Rodd JM(1), Ferreira F(2), Warren JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Psychology and Language Sciences.
(2)Department of Psychology.

Misinterpretations during language comprehension are common. The ability to
recover from processing difficulties is therefore crucial for successful
day-to-day communication. Previous research on the recovery from
misinterpretations has focused on sentences containing syntactic ambiguities. The
present study instead investigated the outcome of comprehension processes and
online reading behavior when misinterpretations occurred due to lexical-semantic 
ambiguity. Ninety-six adult participants read "garden-path" sentences in which an
ambiguous word was disambiguated toward an unexpected meaning (e.g., "The ball
was crowded"), while their eye movements were monitored. A meaning coherence
judgment task required them to decide whether or not each sentence made sense.
Results suggested that readers did not always engage in reinterpretation
processes but instead followed a "good enough" processing strategy. Successful
detection of a violation of sentence coherence and associated reinterpretation
processes also required additional processing time compared to sentences that did
not induce a misinterpretation. Although these reinterpretation-related
processing costs were relatively stable across individuals, there was some
evidence to suggest that readers with greater lexical expertise benefited from
greater sensitivity to the disambiguating information, and were able to flexibly 
adapt their online reading behavior to recover from misinterpretations more
efficiently. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2020 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/xlm0000936 
PMID: 33252925 


196. Front Psychiatry. 2020 Nov 5;11:585270. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.585270.
eCollection 2020.

Self-Compassion Buffers the Adverse Mental Health Impacts of COVID-19-Related
Threats: Results From a Cross-Sectional Survey at the First Peak of Hong Kong's
Outbreak.

Lau BH(1), Chan CL(2), Ng SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Counselling and Psychology, Hong Kong Shue Yan University, Hong 
Kong, China.
(2)Department of Social Work and Social Administration, University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong, China.

COVID-19 has brought tremendous and abrupt threats to various aspects of our
daily lives, from school and work to interpersonal relationships. Self-compassion
is put forth as a salutogenic perspective on oneself that buffers the adverse
mental health impacts of these threats. During the peak of a local outbreak in
Hong Kong in Spring 2020, 761 participants completed questionnaires on
self-compassion, perceived threats, as well as perceived benefits and
psychological distress. Controlling for demographic variables, negative
indicators of self-compassion (aka self-coldness) was found to intensify the
impacts of threats on psychological distress. The positive indicators of
self-compassion also moderated the link between threats and perceived benefits,
such that perceived benefits tend to be less related to threats in participants
with higher self-compassion. Our findings highlight the impacts of both positive 
and negative indicators of self-compassion on the adjustment to such
unprecedented challenges, and point to the possibility of enhancing people's
resilience through fostering self-compassion and alleviating self-coldness.

Copyright © 2020 Lau, Chan and Ng.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.585270 
PMCID: PMC7674650
PMID: 33250793 


197. Complement Ther Med. 2021 Jan;56:102624. doi: 10.1016/j.ctim.2020.102624. Epub
2020 Nov 26.

Perception of integrative care in paediatric oncology-perspectives of parents and
patients.

Stritter W(1), Rutert B(2), Eidenschink C(3), Eggert A(3), Längler A(4), Holmberg
C(5), Seifert G(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Oncology and Hematology, Berlin,
Germany; Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie
Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of
Health, Germany. Electronic address: wiebke.stritter@charite.de.
(2)Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Oncology and Hematology, Berlin,
Germany; Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie
Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of
Health, Germany.
(4)Gemeinschaftskrankenhaus Herdecke, Witten/Herdecke University, Institute for
Integrative Medicine, Germany.
(5)Brandenburg Medical School Theodor Fontane, Institute of Social Medicine and
Epidemiology, Germany.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Oncology and Hematology, Berlin,
Germany; Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie
Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of
Health, Germany; University of São Paulo, Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Pediatrics, São Paulo, Brazil.

PURPOSE: For some years now, a programme for the use of integrative care in
paediatric oncology has been established in a German university hospital and
offers patients and parents complementary treatment options. According to their
medical condition and wishes. A variety of external applications such as medical 
wraps, warm oil compresses and rhythmic embrocations are offered. This article
analyses how patients and parents perceived and experienced the integrative care 
program.
METHODS: In this qualitative study, data consists of field notes conducted
through participant observation, informal conversations and interviews with
parents (n = 25) during the implementation phase of the program. Data was
analysed on basis of thematic analysis and organized with the analysis software
MAXQDA.
RESULTS: Parents and families intuitively developed strategies for dealing with
crisis situations such as childhood cancer. In addition, many of the families
brought with them a wealth of experience in complementary medicine. Parents
perceived the integrative care treatments as soothing, relaxing and
pain-relieving for their child. Patients could relax and side effects of
chemotherapy were alleviated. However, children, who undergoing chemotherapy were
not always open for physical touch and thus sometimes also rejected the
treatments sometimes.
CONCLUSION: The analysed integrative care programme is perceived as a strong
patient and family-centred approach of support during the oncological paediatric 
treatment. From a salutogenetic viewpoint, this program aims to strengthen the
dimension of manageability within the concept of sense of coherence. Parents are 
given supportive means to manage side effects and ease their child's suffering,
through touch and attention that can be very beneficial.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctim.2020.102624 
PMID: 33248249 


198. BMC Psychiatry. 2020 Nov 27;20(1):567. doi: 10.1186/s12888-020-02953-x.

Sense of coherence, mental well-being and perceived preoperative hospital and
surgery related stress in surgical patients with malignant, benign, and no
neoplasms.

Krampe H(1), Goerling U(2), Spies CD(3), Gerhards SK(3), Enge S(4), Salz AL(3),
Kerper LF(3)(5), Schnell T(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Operative Intensive Care Medicine (CCM, CVK),
Charité - Universitätsmedizin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin,
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Charitéplatz 1,
10117, Berlin, Germany. henning.krampe@charite.de.
(2)Charité Comprehensive Cancer Center, Charité - Universitätsmedizin, corporate 
member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin
Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology and Operative Intensive Care Medicine (CCM, CVK),
Charité - Universitätsmedizin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin,
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Charitéplatz 1,
10117, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department of Psychology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Medical School Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(5)Department of Anaesthesiology, Intensive Care, Emergency and Pain Medicine,
Hospital Wolfenbuettel gGmbH, Wolfenbuettel, Germany.
(6)Institute of Psychology, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(7)Norwegian School of Theology, Religion and Society, Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: This prospective, cross-sectional, observational study examined
associations between sense of coherence (SOC), mental well-being, and perceived
preoperative hospital and surgery related stress of surgical patients with
malignant, benign, and no neoplasms. The objective was to assess a putative
association between SOC and preoperative stress, and to test for a statistical
mediation by mental well-being.
METHOD: The sample consisted of 4918 patients from diverse surgical fields, of
which 945 had malignant neoplasms, 333 benign neoplasms, and 3640 no neoplasms.
For each subsample, we conducted simple mediation analyses to test an indirect
effect of SOC on preoperative stress mediated by mental well-being. The models
were adjusted for age, gender, and essential medical factors.
RESULTS: Patient groups did not differ significantly regarding degrees of SOC and
mental well-being (SOC, M [SD]: 12.31 [2.59], 12.02 [2.62], 12.18 [2.57]; mental 
well-being M [SD]: 59.26 [24.05], 56.89 [22.67], 57.31 [22.87], in patients with 
malignant, benign, and without neoplasms, respectively). Patients without
neoplasms reported significantly lower stress (4.19 [2.86], M [SD]) than those
with benign (5.02 [3.03], M [SD]) and malignant neoplasms (4.99 [2.93], M [SD]). 
In all three mediation models, SOC had significant direct effects on stress, with
higher SOC being associated with lower stress (- 0.3170 [0.0407], - 0.3484
[0.0752], - 0.2919 [0.0206]; c' [SE], p < 0.001 in patients with malignant,
benign, and without neoplasms, respectively). In patients with malignant
neoplasms and without neoplasms, SOC showed small indirect effects on stress that
were statistically mediated by well-being. Higher SOC was related to higher
well-being, which in turn was related to lower stress. In patients with benign
neoplasms, however, no significant indirect effects of SOC were found.
CONCLUSIONS: SOC was directly associated with lower perceived hospital and
surgery related stress, over and above the direct and mediation effects of mental
well-being. Because the data are cross-sectional, conclusions implying causality 
cannot be drawn. Nevertheless, they indicate important relationships that can
inform treatment approaches to reduce elevated preoperative stress by
specifically addressing low SOC.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01357694 . Registered 18
May 2011.

DOI: 10.1186/s12888-020-02953-x 
PMCID: PMC7693497
PMID: 33246438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Front Psychol. 2020 Nov 6;11:578440. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.578440. eCollection 
2020.

Facing the COVID-19 Pandemic: The Role of Sense of Coherence.

Barni D(1), Danioni F(2), Canzi E(2)(3), Ferrari L(2)(3), Ranieri S(2)(3), Lanz
M(2)(3), Iafrate R(2)(3), Regalia C(2)(3), Rosnati R(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Social Sciences, University of Bergamo, Bergamo,
Italy.
(2)Family Studies and Research University Centre, Catholic University of the
Sacred Heart, Milano, Italy.
(3)Department of Psychology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Milano,
Italy.

The worldwide outbreak of COVID-19, the ensuing pandemic, and the related
containment measures pose considerable challenges to psychological resilience and
well-being. Researchers are now forced to look for resources to cope with
negative experiences linked to this health emergency. According to the
salutogenic approach proposed by Antonovsky, the sense of coherence (SOC) is a
major source of resilience. Thus, this study aimed at assessing the role of SOC
in moderating the link between illness experiences (in terms of knowing persons
diagnosed with COVID-19 and fear of contracting COVID-19) and psychological
well-being. 2,784 participants, taken from a large sample of the Italian
population (65.4% females) and aged between 18 and 85 years, filled in an
anonymous online survey during the 3rd week of the lockdown. Findings supported
the moderating role of SOC in shaping the link between illness experiences and
psychological well-being. Specifically, participants who knew at least one person
diagnosed with COVID-19 showed lower levels of psychological well-being at low
levels of SOC. The negative relation between participants' fear of contracting
COVID-19 and psychological well-being was stronger for those who showed higher
levels of SOC. This study discusses the implications of these results for
interventions aimed at reducing the pandemic's detrimental effects and promoting 
resilience.

Copyright © 2020 Barni, Danioni, Canzi, Ferrari, Ranieri, Lanz, Iafrate, Regalia 
and Rosnati.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.578440 
PMCID: PMC7677188
PMID: 33240166 


200. Elife. 2020 Nov 23;9. pii: e61469. doi: 10.7554/eLife.61469.

Sense of coherence and risk of breast cancer.

Hu K(1), Eriksson M(2), Wengström Y(3), Czene K(2), Hall P(2), Fang F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Integrative Epidemiology, Institute of Environmental Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet &
Theme Cancer, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

Sense of coherence (SoC) is the origin of health according to Antonovsky. The
link between SoC and risk of cancer has however rarely been assessed. We
performed a cohort study of 46,436 women from the Karolinska Mammography Project 
for Risk Prediction of Breast Cancer (Karma). Participants answered a SoC-13
questionnaire at recruitment to Karma and were subsequently followed up for
incident breast cancer. Multivariate Cox models were used to assess the hazard
ratios (HRs) of breast cancer in relation to SoC. We identified 771 incident
cases of breast cancer during follow-up (median time: 5.2 years). No association 
was found between SoC, either as a categorical (strong vs. weak SoC, HR: 1.08,
95% CI: 0.90-1.29) or continuous (HR: 1.08; 95% CI: 1.00-1.17 per standard
deviation increase of SoC) variable, and risk of breast cancer. In summary, we
found little evidence to support an association between SoC and risk of breast
cancer.

© 2020, Hu et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.61469 
PMCID: PMC7717898
PMID: 33226344  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: KH, ME, YW, KC, PH, FF No competing interests
declared


201. J Clin Med. 2020 Nov 18;9(11). pii: E3708. doi: 10.3390/jcm9113708.

Mental Health, Sense of Coherence, and Interpersonal Violence during the COVID-19
Pandemic Lockdown in Germany.

Jung S(1), Kneer J(1), Krüger THC(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Social Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Division of
Clinical Psychology and Sexual Medicine, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.
(2)Center for Systems Neuroscience, Bünteweg 2, 30559 Hannover, Germany.

Preliminary data indicates that the Coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 disease (COVID-19)
pandemic may have a substantial impact on mental health and well-being. We
assessed mental health in response to the lockdown in Germany between 1 April
2020 and 15 April 2020 using a cross-sectional online survey (n = 3545) with a
mixed-methods approach. We found increased levels of psychosocial distress
(Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ) stress module), anxiety, depressive symptoms 
(PHQ-4), irritability, and a decrease in overall well-being (WHO-Five Well-Being 
Index (WHO-5)), sense of coherence (Short Form of the Sense of Coherence Scale
(SOC-L9)), sexual contentment, and sleep quality. The four-week-prevalence of
interpersonal violence was yet at 5% and included verbal, physical, and sexual
violence. Participants reported finding comfort in family, friends, conversation,
exercise, and activity. Findings are also in line with research showing that
women seem to have more trouble coping with the pandemic and lockdown measures.
Our observations demonstrate that the COVID-19 pandemic and related measures lead
to a mental health burden even in a highly developed Western country and should, 
therefore, be taken seriously. The findings for interpersonal violence are
alarming. Thus, we should sharpen our focus on the matter and activate and
enhance supporting systems to help protect those affected.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm9113708 
PMCID: PMC7699150
PMID: 33218215 


202. Phys Rev E. 2020 Oct;102(4-1):042211. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.102.042211.

Semiclassical evaluation of expectation values.

Mittal KM(1)(2), Giraud O(1), Ullmo D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, LPTMS, 91405 Orsay, France.
(2)Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Pune 411 008, India.

Semiclassical mechanics allows for a description of quantum systems which
preserves their phase information, and thus interference effects, while using
only the system's classical dynamics as an input. In particular one of the
strengths of a semiclassical description is to present a coherent picture which
(to negligible higher-order ℏ corrections) is independent of the particular
canonical coordinates used. However, this coherence relies heavily on the use of 
the stationary phase approximation. It turns out, however, that in some important
cases, a brutal application of stationary phase approximation washes out all
interference, and thus quantum, effects. In this paper, we address this issue in 
detail in one of its simplest instantiations, namely the evaluation of the time
evolution of the expectation value of an operator. We explain why it is necessary
to include contributions which are not in the neighborhood of stationary points
and provide new semiclassical expressions for the evolution of the expectation
values. The efficiency of our approach is based on the fact that we treat
analytically all the integrals that can be performed within the stationary phase 
approximation, implying that the remaining integrals are simple integrals, in the
sense that the integrand has no significant variations on the quantum scale (and 
thus they are very easy to perform numerically). This to be contrasted with other
approaches such as the ones based on initial value representation, popular in
chemical and molecular physics, which avoid a root search for the classical
dynamics, but at the cost of performing numerically integrals whose evaluation
requires a sampling on the quantum scale, and which are therefore not well
designed to address the deep semiclassical regime. Along the way, we get a deeper
understanding of the origin of these interference effects and an intuitive
geometric picture associated with them.

DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevE.102.042211 
PMID: 33212679 


203. Complement Ther Med. 2021 Jan;56:102598. doi: 10.1016/j.ctim.2020.102598. Epub
2020 Nov 16.

Meditation Based Lifestyle Modification (MBLM) in outpatients with mild to
moderate depression: A mixed-methods feasibility study.

Bringmann HC(1), Bringmann N(2), Jeitler M(3), Brunnhuber S(2), Michalsen A(3),
Sedlmeier P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Social Medicine, Epidemiology and Health Economics,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany, Corporate member of Freie
Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of
Health; Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy,
Diakoniekliniken Zschadrass, Colditz, Germany. Electronic address:
holger.bringmann@charite.de.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, Diakoniekliniken
Zschadrass, Colditz, Germany.
(3)Institute for Social Medicine, Epidemiology and Health Economics,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany, Corporate member of Freie
Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of
Health; Department of Internal and Integrative Medicine, Immanuel Hospital
Berlin, Germany.
(4)Institute of Psychology, Chemnitz University of Technology, Chemnitz, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Integrative mental health care can be applied to treat depression
with a person-centered, lifestyle-modifying, and more salutogenic approach to
mental health and human flourishing. In this article, we report on the
feasibility and acceptability of a new mind-body program, Meditation Based
Lifestyle Modification (MBLM), in outpatients with mild or moderate depression.
METHODS: This is a single-arm mixed-methods feasibility study of n = 25
outpatients in psychiatric care. Depressive symptoms, scores for mindfulness,
aspects of spirituality, and eudaemonic well-being based on yoga philosophy were 
assessed at baseline and at the end of the intervention. Adherence was monitored 
and face-to-face interviews were held after the program to explore the
acceptability and feasibility of MBLM.
RESULTS: Twenty patients (75 %) completed at least six sessions of the course.
Adherence was 87.5 % of allocated sessions. In qualitative analysis, more than
half of the participants experienced novelty and inspiration through practicing
the ethical aspects of yoga (e.g., nonviolence, truthfulness, etc.). Almost all
participants experienced a decrease in emotional distress. Virtually all
participants reported more self-confidence and self-acceptance. In quantitative
analysis, participants reported a clinically important decrease in depressive
symptoms of 39.23 % (p = .002), eudaemonic well-being increased significantly in 
a range of related scales and scores for mindfulness increased (p < .001).
CONCLUSION: MBLM is a highly acceptable and feasible program for outpatients with
mild to moderate depression. This comprehensive, lifestyle-modifying approach is 
highly relevant to preventing and treating mental illness, and treating psychic
comorbidities in patients with chronic somatic illness.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctim.2020.102598 
PMID: 33212169 


204. J Adv Nurs. 2021 Mar;77(3):1518-1532. doi: 10.1111/jan.14649. Epub 2020 Nov 19.

Effectiveness of physical activity prescription by primary care nurses using
health assets: A randomized controlled trial.

Riera-Sampol A(1)(2)(3), Bennasar-Veny M(1)(2)(3), Tauler P(1)(3)(4), Aguilo
A(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group on Evidence, Lifestyles and Health, University of the Balearic 
Islands, Palma, Spain.
(2)Department of Nursing and Physiotherapy, University of the Balearic Islands,
Palma, Spain.
(3)Health Research Institute of the Balearic Islands (IdISBa), Palma, Spain.
(4)Department of Fundamental Biology and Health Sciences, University of the
Balearic Islands, Palma, Spain.

AIM: To evaluate the effectiveness of a 12-month multifactorial intervention by
primary care nurses using health assets in increasing adherence to physical
activity prescription (150 min/week) in patients with two or more cardiovascular 
risk factors.
BACKGROUND: Physical activity promotion is a priority and helps to decrease
mortality risk due to cardiovascular diseases. However, adherence to the habitual
physical activity prescription in primary healthcare settings is low.
DESIGN: Multicentre, single-blind, parallel randomized (in two different
branches) clinical trial.
METHODS: In total, 263 participants from 20 primary healthcare centres in
Mallorca completed the randomized controlled trial study (intervention group
N = 128, control group N = 135). The intervention consisted in four visits and
included a motivational interview and an individualized prescription of physical 
activity using health assets. Primary outcome measure was the number of
participants performing at least 150 min of weekly physical activity. Secondary
outcomes included physical activity level and physical fitness, Sense of
Coherence, cardiovascular risk, sociodemographic data, trans-theoretical stage of
change, sleep quality, and depression.
RESULTS: Adherence to the recommendation of at least 150 min of physical activity
was higher in the intervention than in the control group (χ2  = 3.951, p = .047).
However, this higher adherence did not suppose higher physical activity levels
because no differences between groups were found in the total physical activity
performed after intervention (t=-0.915, p = .361). At the end of the intervention
participants randomized to the intervention group spent more time walking than
participants in the control group (t = 2.260, p = .025).
CONCLUSION: The multifactorial intervention performed by primary care nurses
induced a higher adherence to the 150-min of weekly physical activity
recommendation.
IMPACT: Adherence to the usual physical activity prescription in primary care is 
low. Physical activity prescription performed by primary care nurses and based on
health assets and motivational interview can help to increase physical activity
levels of patients. The main finding of the present study was that prescription
using this approach was shown to be effective, leading to a higher adherence in
the intervention group. This intervention is feasible in the nurse's primary
healthcare setting, thus it could be implemented as the main tool when exercise
is prescribed.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: International Standard Randomized Controlled Trial Number:
ISRCTN76069254.

Publisher: 目的: 评估初级护理护士利用健康资产对有两个或两个以上心血管危险因素的患者进行为期12个月的多重危险因素干预, 以提高对体力活动处方
(150分钟/周) 依从性的有效性。 背景: 应优先提升体力活动, 其有助于降低心血管疾病而死亡的风险。然而, 在初级保健机构中,
很少有人能坚持习惯性体力活动处方。 设计: 多中心、单盲、平行随机 (两个分支) 临床试验。 方法:
总共有来自马略卡岛20个初级保健中心的263名参与者完成了随机对照试验研究 (干预组N=128, 对照组N=135) 。干预包括四次视察,
包括动机访谈和使用健康资产的体力活动的个性化处方。主要结果是参与者每周至少进行150分钟体力活动的人数。次要结果包括体力活动水平和身体素质、连贯性、心血管风险、社
会人口统计学数据、跨理论变化阶段、睡眠质量和抑郁。 结果: 干预组对至少150分钟体力活动的坚持程度高于对照组 (χ2 =3.951,p=.047) 。然而,
这种更高的依从性并不意味着更高的体力活动水平, 原因是未在干预后进行的总体力活动发现组间差异 (t=-0.915,p=.361) 。干预结束时,
随机分入干预组的参与者比对照组的参与者花在步行上的时间更长(t=2.260,p=0.025) 。 结论:
由初级护理护士实施的多因素干预导致使患者更依从每周150分钟体力活动建议。 影响: 在初级护理中,
很少有人坚持通常体力活动处方。由初级护理护士根据健康资产和动机访谈制定的体力活动处方有助于提高患者的体力活动水平。本研究的主要发现是,
使用该方法的处方被证明是有效的, 导致干预组的依从性更高。这种干预在护士的初级保健机构中是可行的, 因此在规定运动时, 其可以作为主要实施工具。 试验注册:
国际标准随机对照试验编号:ISRCTN76069254.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jan.14649 
PMID: 33210773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Ophthalmic Genet. 2021 Apr;42(2):209-215. doi: 10.1080/13816810.2020.1849315.
Epub 2020 Nov 17.

Long-term follow-up of adult patient with neurofibromatosis type 1 with retinal
astrocytic hamartoma using spectral-domain optical coherence tomography: a review
of the literature and a report of a case.

Abdolrahimzadeh S(1), Formisano M(2), Scuderi L(2), Rahimi S(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology Unit, NESMOS Department, University of Rome Sapienza, St.Andrea 
Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(2)Ophthalmology Unit, Department of Sense Organs, University of Rome Sapienza,
Azienda Policlinico Umberto I, Rome, Italy.
(3)Histopathology, Brighton and Sussex University Hospitals NHS Trust, Brighton, 
UK.
(4)School of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences, University of Portsmouth,
Portsmouth, UK.

Background: Retinal astrocytic hamartoma (RAH) is a tumor that can be sporadic or
in the context of tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) and has been reported to be
associated with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) in a few cases.Patient and
methods: A 65-year-old male patient with NF1 was referred for ophthalmological
evaluation. Comprehensive examination, near-infrared reflectance (NIR),
spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SDOCT), fluorescein angiography
(FFA), and indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) were carried out. The follow-up
of the patient was at 4 and 7 years.Results: Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) 
was 20/20 in both eyes. Anterior segment examination revealed bilateral Lisch
nodules. Fundus examination was unremarkable but at NIR and SDOCT the patient
presented choroidal hamartoma, microvascular retinal alterations, and enlarged
choroidal vessels in both eyes. NIR also revealed an unusual area of
peripapillary hyporeflectivity in the right eye. On SDOCT, this corresponded to
an elevated peripapillary mass characterized by intralesional optically empty
cavities in the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) and ganglion cell layer-inner
plexiform layer (GCL-IPL), diagnosed as a RAH. Four years later, BCVA was 20/25
with a retinal schisis departing from the lesion to the macula. At 7 years, BCVA 
was stable at 20/25, the lesion was smaller, and there was a slight reduction of 
the schisis.Conclusion: RAH is a rare finding in NF1 and the translucent type has
not been previously reported. RAH in NF1 has a peripapillary location and
demonstrates clinically unpredictable behavior; thus, close monitoring with
multimodal imaging is advisable.

DOI: 10.1080/13816810.2020.1849315 
PMID: 33203322 


206. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Nov 13;17(22). pii: E8390. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17228390.

One Virus, Four Continents, Eight Countries: An Interdisciplinary and
International Study on the Psychosocial Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic among
Adults.

Généreux M(1), Schluter PJ(2), Hung KK(3), Wong CS(3), Pui Yin Mok C(3),
O'Sullivan T(4), David MD(5), Carignan ME(5), Blouin-Genest G(6),
Champagne-Poirier O(5), Champagne É(7), Burlone N(7), Qadar Z(8), Herbosa T(9),
Ribeiro-Alves G(10), Law R(11), Murray V(12), Chan EYY(3), Pignard-Cheynel N(13),
Salerno S(14), Lits G(15), d'Haenens L(16), Coninck D(17), Matthys K(17), Roy
M(18).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine & Health
Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC J1H 5N4, Canada.
(2)School of Health Sciences, University of Canterbury-Te Whare Wananga o
Waitaha, Christchurch 8140, New Zealand.
(3)Collaborating Centre for Oxford University and CUHK for Disaster and Medical
Humanitarian Response, JC School of Public Health and Primary Care, Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Ngan Shing Street 30-32, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(4)Interdisciplinary School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1N 7K4, Canada.
(5)Département de communication, Faculté des Lettres et Sciences Humaines,
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC J1K 2R1, Canada.
(6)School of Applied Politics, Faculté des Lettres et Sciences Humaines,
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC J1K 2R1, Canada.
(7)School of Political Studies, Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, Ontario K1N 6N5, Canada.
(8)National Collaborating Centre for Infectious Diseases, Rady Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB R3E 0T5, Canada.
(9)Department of Emergency Medicine, College of Medicine, University of
Philippines, Manille Grand Manille 1000, Philippines.
(10)Centro Universitário de Brasília, Brasília 70850-090, Brazil.
(11)Department of Health, Manila, Manille 2932, Philippines.
(12)Public Health England, London SE1 8UG, UK.
(13)Académie du journalisme et des médias, Université de Neuchâtel, 2000
Neuchâtel, Switzerland.
(14)Université de Genève, Boulevard du Pont-d'Arve 40, 1205 Genève, Switzerland.
(15)Institut Langage et Communication, Université catholique de Louvain, 1348
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
(16)Institute for Media Studies, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(17)Centre for Sociological Research, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(18)Department of Family Medicine & Emergency Medicine, Faculty of Medicine &
Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC J1H 5N4, Canada.

The novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic brought about several
features that increased the sense of fear and confusion, such as quarantine and
financial losses among other stressors, which may have led to adverse
psychosocial outcomes. The influence of such stressors took place within a
broader sociocultural context that needs to be considered. The objective was to
examine how the psychological response to the pandemic varied across countries
and identify which risk/protective factors contributed to this response. An
online survey was conducted from 29 May 2020-12 June 2020, among a multinational 
sample of 8806 adults from eight countries/regions (Canada, United States,
England, Switzerland, Belgium, Hong Kong, Philippines, New Zealand). Probable
generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) and major depression episode (MDE) were
assessed. The independent role of a wide range of potential factors was examined 
using multilevel logistic regression. Probable GAD and MDE were indicated by
21.0% and 25.5% of the respondents, respectively, with an important variation
according to countries/regions (GAD: 12.2-31.0%; MDE: 16.7-32.9%). When
considered together, 30.2% of the participants indicated probable GAD or MDE.
Several factors were positively associated with a probable GAD or MDE, including 
(in descending order of importance) weak sense of coherence (SOC), lower age,
false beliefs, isolation, threat perceived for oneself/family, mistrust in
authorities, stigma, threat perceived for country/world, financial losses, being 
a female, and having a high level of information about COVID-19. Having a weak
SOC yielded the highest adjusted odds ratio for probable GAD or MDE (3.21; 95%
confidence interval (CI): 2.73-3.77). This pandemic is having an impact on
psychological health. In some places and under certain circumstances, however,
people seem to be better protected psychologically. This is a unique opportunity 
to evaluate the psychosocial impacts across various sociocultural backgrounds,
providing important lessons that could inform all phases of disaster risk
management.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17228390 
PMCID: PMC7697775
PMID: 33202706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Nurs Meas. 2020 Nov 16. pii: JNM-D-19-00107. doi: 10.1891/JNM-D-19-00107. [Epub
ahead of print]

Exploring the Reliability and Validity of the Adapted Arabic Sense of Coherence
Scale.

Al-Yateem N(1), Alrimawi I(2), Fakhry R(3), AlShujairi A(3), Rahman SA(3), Al
Marzouqi A(3), Rossiter R(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of Sharjah, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates Charles Sturt University,
NSW, Australia Nalyateem@sharjah.ac.ae.
(2)Trinity Washington University, Washington.
(3)University of Sharjah, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates.
(4)Charles Sturt University, NSW, Australia.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Applying strategies that improve sense of coherence (SOC)
may positively affect adolescents' wellbeing. This may be particularly beneficial
for those with chronic conditions. Therefore, having a valid measurement tool for
SOC is important. This study assessed the validity and reliability of the Arabic 
version of the SOC questionnaire (A-SOC). Secondary objectives were to establish 
baseline data on SOC levels in a population of adolescents in the United Arab
Emirates.
METHODS: We used a cross-sectional correlational design.
RESULTS: The A-SOC was found to be a valid tool, with a Cronbach's alpha of 0.75.
The mean A-SOC score in the study sample was 57.38.
CONCLUSIONS: Following an initial assessment of children's SOC, healthcare
professionals could implement strategies that improve SOC for this population,
thereby improving their general wellbeing.

© Copyright 2020 Springer Publishing Company, LLC.

DOI: 10.1891/JNM-D-19-00107 
PMID: 33199486 


208. Eur J Ophthalmol. 2020 Nov 16:1120672120970405. doi: 10.1177/1120672120970405.
[Epub ahead of print]

Bilateral choroidal metastasis from adenoid cystic carcinoma of the submandibular
salivary gland.

Bacherini D(1), Pellegrini M(2), Vicini G(1)(3), Nicolosi C(1)(3), Pieretti
G(1)(3), Vannozzi L(1), Rizzo S(4), Mazzini C(1)(3), Giansanti F(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Eye Clinic, Neuromuscular and Sense Organs Department, Careggi University
Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(2)Ophthalmology Unit, S. Orsola-Mapighi University Hospital, University of
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(3)Unit of Ocular Oncology, Neuromuscular and Sense Organs Department, Careggi
University Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(4)Ophthalmology Unit, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Fondazione
Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Neurosciences, Psychology, Drug Research and Child Health,
University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

PURPOSE: A case of bilateral choroidal metastasis from an adenoid cystic
carcinoma of the submandibular gland is described.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 45-years-old woman with a history of metastatic adenoid
cystic carcinoma presented with visual impairment in both eyes. Fundus images
showed bilateral creamy-white choroidal masses. Optical coherence tomography
revealed subretinal fluid with high reflective speckles and a "lumpy bumpy"
anterior contour of the lesions. Fluorescein angiography showed a hypofluorescent
pattern of the lesions in early arterial phases, and progressive late
hyperfluorescence. A diagnosis of bilateral choroidal metastasis from adenoid
cystic carcinoma was made. The patient was advised to underwent palliative
chemotherapy, but she expired a few weeks after the diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: Salivary gland carcinoma rarely metastasizes to the choroid, with few
cases described in literature. In patients with a history of salivary glands
tumor the possibility of choroidal metastatization should always be considered.

DOI: 10.1177/1120672120970405 
PMID: 33198499 


209. Front Psychol. 2020 Oct 28;11:567419. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.567419. eCollection
2020.

Fostering the Reconstruction of Meaning Among the General Population During the
COVID-19 Pandemic.

Castiglioni M(1), Gaj N(2).

Author information: 
(1)"R. Massa" Department of Human Sciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Psychology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Milan,
Italy.

The COVID-19 outbreak has seen people in many countries asked to radically modify
their way of life in compliance with sweeping safety measures. During the current
crisis, technology is turning out to be key, in that it allows practitioners to
deliver psychological services to people who would otherwise be unreachable.
However, professionals cannot solely rely on their traditional modes of practice,
in that different methods are required to bring to light the needs of those
affected by the emergency. People are being overwhelmed by a cascade of unusual
and unexpected events that are putting a strain on their everyday routines and
usual meaning-making systems; ongoing challenges to their employment and
financial status will likely divert personal resources away from psychological
well-being. We therefore argue that psychologists should also consider the needs 
of the general population. Among those who may require help-aside from the main
targets of psychological intervention, such as healthcare personnel and COVID-19 
patients and their relatives-specific attention should be paid to those who are
not at the center of the crisis. We suggest that this large segment of potential 
users may benefit from a non-medical approach focused on the promotion of
meaning-making processes. Indeed, the disruptive nature of the current situation 
hinders sense-making and threatens to undermine psychological balance and
well-being, at an individual as well as at a societal level. The present article 
proposes a methodological perspective based on the reconstruction of
meaning-making processes (sense of coherence, predictability, metaphors,
narratives). Specifically, psychological interventions should promote personal
and collective resources with a view to: "normalizing" current distressful
experiences (i.e., acknowledging that such reactions are normal in light of the
present situation); widening the observational field, taking relational contexts 
into account, and promoting an understanding of distressful experiences as coping
strategies; fostering meaning-making/reconstruction processes through the use of 
appropriate metaphors and narratives; promoting a sense of coherence. We present 
two clinical vignettes to illustrate how these principles might be applied in
practice. In conclusion, the exceptional psychological challenges posed by the
COVID-19 pandemic require practitioners to adopt a broad and flexible perspective
on clinical intervention.

Copyright © 2020 Castiglioni and Gaj.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.567419 
PMCID: PMC7655933
PMID: 33192849 


210. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2021 May;36(5):722-730. doi: 10.1002/gps.5472. Epub
2020 Nov 21.

The mediating role of sense of coherence on mental health outcomes in carers of
older dependent relatives: A longitudinal study.

López-Martínez C(1), Orgeta V(2), Frías-Osuna A(1), Del-Pino-Casado R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Jaén, Jaén,
Spain.
(2)Division of Psychiatry, University College London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Sense of coherence (SOC) is an important protective factor for carer 
well-being but research to date remains cross-sectional, focusing primarily on
the direct effects of SOC on carers' mental health. The study's aim was to
investigate the mediating role of SOC in the longitudinal relationship between
caregiver strain and carers' psychological health, and its stability over time.
METHODS: Prospective longitudinal study conducted in Jaén (Spain) with a
probabilistic sample of 132 carers of older people, with data collected at
baseline and at 1-year follow-up. We measured SOC, caregiver strain, anxiety and 
depressive symptoms, and several care-recipient characteristics and intensity of 
care provided. We used multiple linear regression modelling and the Sobel test to
analyse mediation effects.
RESULTS: SOC was significantly negatively longitudinally associated with both
anxiety (β = -0.38, p = 0.001) and depressive symptoms (β = -0.28, p = 0.023),
after controlling for several confounders. SOC mediated both the relationship
between caregiver strain and anxiety, and caregiver strain and depressive
symptoms (Sobel test: p < 0.001 for anxiety and p < 0.001 for depressive
symptoms). Differences between baseline and 1-year follow-up SOC scores were not 
statistically significant (p = 0.617).
CONCLUSIONS: SOC appears to buffer the impact of caregiver strain on symptoms of 
depression and anxiety in informal carers of older people. Our data showed that
SOC is an important psychological resource for carers that remained relatively
stable under non-experimental conditions over a period of 1 year in this sample. 
The findings suggest that interventions aimed at strengthening SOC may protect
carer psychological well-being.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.5472 
PMID: 33184903  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2021 May-Jun 01;36(3):221-228. doi:
10.1097/JCN.0000000000000762.

Development of a Nostalgic Remembering Intervention: Feeling Safe in Dyads
Receiving Palliative Care for Advanced Heart Failure.

Fleury J, Komnenich P, Coon DW, Volk-Craft B.

BACKGROUND: Dyads receiving palliative care for advanced heart failure are at
risk for the loss of feeling safe, experienced as a fractured sense of coherence,
discontinuity in sense of self and relationships, and strained social connections
and altered roles. However, few theory-based interventions have addressed feeling
safe in this vulnerable population.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this article is to describe the development of the
Nostalgic Remembering Intervention to strengthen feeling safe and promote
adaptive physiological and psychological regulation in dyads receiving palliative
care for heart failure.
CONCLUSIONS: Systematic intervention development is essential to understand what,
for whom, why, and how an intervention works in producing outcomes. Program
theory provided a systematic approach to the development of the Nostalgic
Remembering Intervention, including conceptualization of the problem targeted by 
the intervention, specification of critical inputs and conditions that
operationalize the intervention, and understanding the mediating processes
leading to expected outcomes.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Creating a foundation for cardiovascular nursing research 
and practice requires continued, systematic development of theory-based
interventions to best meet the needs of dyads receiving palliative care for heart
failure. The development of the Nostalgic Remembering Intervention to strengthen 
feeling safe in dyads provides a novel and relevant approach.

Copyright © 2020 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/JCN.0000000000000762 
PMCID: PMC8041566
PMID: 33181536 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding or conflicts of
interest to disclose.


212. Front Psychol. 2020 Oct 15;11:577708. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.577708. eCollection
2020.

From Shattered Goals to Meaning in Life: Life Crafting in Times of the COVID-19
Pandemic.

de Jong EM(1), Ziegler N(1), Schippers MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Technology and Operations Management, Rotterdam School of
Management, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

The novel COVID-19 pandemic has created an extraordinary situation for our
generation, with many countries being on lockdown. With this, new situation comes
many psychological challenges not only for health care workers and people
suffering from COVID-19 but also for the general population. Adapting to the new 
situation can be demanding. Experts have suggested that emotions during this
situation are very similar to grief, and people experience emptiness and sadness 
about the loss of their normal lives, which can even lead to a loss of meaning in
life. In this paper, we argue that life crafting could offer a way to help people
cope with the situation and renew their sense of meaning. A life crafting
intervention is based on theoretical insights from multiple areas of research,
like positive psychology, expressive writing, and the salutogenesis framework.
Life-crafting interventions help people find meaning in life by focusing on their
ideal future, and helping them set goals, and make concrete plans to achieve
those goals and overcome obstacles. Since having a clear purpose or meaning in
life has been shown to have many benefits, we propose that it can also help
people to cope with the psychological effects of the pandemic. A life-crafting
intervention can offer people a chance to evaluate their goals in a time of
uncertainty and rediscover meaning in life to guide them through these difficult 
times.

Copyright © 2020 de Jong, Ziegler and Schippers.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.577708 
PMCID: PMC7593511
PMID: 33178081 


213. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Nov 6;17(21). pii: E8202. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17218202.

Physical Activity, Resilience, Sense of Coherence and Coping in People with
Multiple Sclerosis in the Situation Derived from COVID-19.

Reguera-García MM(1), Liébana-Presa C(1), Álvarez-Barrio L(2), Alves Gomes L(3), 
Fernández-Martínez E(1).

Author information: 
(1)SALBIS Research Group, Faculty of Health Sciences, Campus of Ponferrada,
University of León, 24401 Ponferrada, Spain.
(2)Department of Nursing and Physiotherapy, Faculty of Health Sciences, Campus of
Ponferrada, University of León, 24401 Ponferrada, Spain.
(3)Nursing School, Minho University, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal.

The confinement forced by COVID-19 can have repercussions on the health of people
diagnosed with multiple sclerosis. The objective of this study is to analyze the 
relationships between physical activity, a sense of coherence, resilience and
coping among people diagnosed with Multiple Sclerosis during the health emergency
situation. To achieve this goal, this transversal descriptive study included 84
patients that belonged to multiple sclerosis associations during the period of
confinement. Participants filled out the Physical Activity (IPAQ-SF), Sense of
Coherence (SOC-13), Resilience Scale (ER-14) and coping (COPE-28) questionnaires.
The results showed that the average age was 46.9 and that 67.9% had Relapsing
Remittent Multiple Sclerosis diagnosed on average 13.9 years ago. They had a high
degree (33.3%) and moderate degree (34.5%) of physical activity, high levels of
resilience, while the level of a sense of coherence was average and the most
commonly used strategies for coping were active confrontation and religion.
Physical activity was not related to the rest of the studied variables, but there
were correlations between the other variables. The people with multiple sclerosis
who belong to patient associations have remained physically active during the
obligatory confinement period and have elevated degrees of resilience and an
average sense of coherence, as well as using suitable coping strategies, which is
why the social-health resource of belonging to a patient association could be
boosting these variables that are beneficial to their health.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17218202 
PMCID: PMC7664264
PMID: 33172022  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Ecohealth. 2020 Nov 10. doi: 10.1007/s10393-020-01493-w. [Epub ahead of print]

Urban Aerobiomes are Influenced by Season, Vegetation, and Individual Site
Characteristics.

Mhuireach GÁ(1)(2)(3), Wilson H(4)(5), Johnson BR(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Landscape Architecture, University of Oregon, 5250 University of
Oregon, Eugene, OR, 97403, USA. gwynhwyfer.mhuireach@gmail.com.
(2)Biology and the Built Environment (BioBE) Center, University of Oregon,
Eugene, OR, USA. gwynhwyfer.mhuireach@gmail.com.
(3)Institute for Health in the Built Environment, University of Oregon, Eugene,
OR, USA. gwynhwyfer.mhuireach@gmail.com.
(4)Biology and the Built Environment (BioBE) Center, University of Oregon,
Eugene, OR, USA.
(5)Division of Plant Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA.
(6)Department of Landscape Architecture, University of Oregon, 5250 University of
Oregon, Eugene, OR, 97403, USA.

Exposure to biodiverse environments such as forests can benefit human well-being,
and evidence suggests exposure to high microbial diversity may improve mental and
immune health. However, the factors that drive microbial community assembly are
poorly understood, as is the relationship between exposure to these communities
and human health. We characterized airborne bacterial communities in two
disparate types of urban greenspace (forest and grass) in late-spring 2017 at
sites previously sampled in late-summer 2015 in Eugene-Springfield, Oregon, using
high-throughput metabarcode sequencing. While all sites shared a core aerobiome
in late-spring consisting of plant- and soil-associated genera, forests had
significantly higher diversity than grass sites (F = 12, P = 0.004). Vegetation
type explained 14% of the difference between forest and grass aerobiomes, yet
individual site location explained 41% of the variation. These results were
similar to but amplified over those from late summer, suggesting that both
aerobiome diversity and vegetation-driven effects are higher when deciduous
foliage is fresher and more active, temperatures cooler, and humidity higher.
Continued exploration and hypothesis-driven research will enable development of
mechanistic theory describing key drivers of urban aerobiome assembly and its
relationship to human health, which, in turn, will help urban designers and
planners create evidence-based salutogenic cities for future generations.

DOI: 10.1007/s10393-020-01493-w 
PMID: 33170406 


215. Int J Qual Stud Health Well-being. 2020 Dec;15(1):1842015. doi:
10.1080/17482631.2020.1842015.

Adolescent siblings of children with cancer: a qualitative study from a
salutogenic health promotion perspective.

Løkkeberg B(1), Sollesnes R(1), Hestvik J(2), Langeland E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Caring Science, Faculty of Health and Social
Sciences, Western Norway University of Applied Sciences , Bergen, Norway.
(2)Children's Clinic, Department of Cancer and Haemathology, St. Olavs Hospital, 
Trondheim University Hospital , Trondheim, Norway.

PURPOSE: To explore the experiences of adolescents with a sibling suffering from 
cancer from a salutogenic health promotion perspective.
METHODS: Seven female siblings aged 13-17 years were interviewed. The interviews 
were transcribed and subjected to qualitative content analysis.
RESULTS: The analysis findings adhered largely to one main theme: new challenges 
and needs in everyday life, consisting of the two domains cancer into life and
helpful resources to cope. Categories related to the cancer into life domain were
new routines and concerns, fear, loneliness, and growing up. Helpful resources to
cope were categorized as support from others, understanding, faith and hope, and 
normal activities.
CONCLUSION: Prominent in the siblings' descriptions were the challenging changes 
in everyday life including difficult feelings such as loneliness, and a need for 
understanding. Social support appeared as a crucial salutogenic coping resource
to achieve understanding, faith and hope, and identity-crucial spheres to achieve
meaning in life. This study has demonstrated the significance of salutogenesis in
a new setting, and the findings could be of relevance to teachers and health
professionals consulting with the siblings of children with cancer. Further
research should be conducted to pinpoint concrete health-promoting measures that 
might benefit this group.

DOI: 10.1080/17482631.2020.1842015 
PMCID: PMC7655063
PMID: 33164698 


216. Adv Med Educ Pract. 2020 Oct 30;11:807-816. doi: 10.2147/AMEP.S266960.
eCollection 2020.

Promoting Students' Sense of Coherence in Medical Education Using Transformative 
Learning Activities.

Hatlevik IKR(1), Hovdenak SS(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Teacher Education and School Research, Faculty of Educational
Sciences, University of Oslo, Oslo 0317, Norway.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Tromsø - The Arctic University of
Norway, Tromsø, Norway.

Objective: Transformative learning theory offers medical educators a particularly
relevant insight into student learning. Transformative learning involves
critically reflecting on assumptions and actions using empirical research methods
and participating in a continuing discourse to validate the best reflective
judgement and act according to new insights. The purpose of this paper is to
investigate medical students' experiences with transformative learning activities
and empirically and theoretically explain how these activities contribute to
their understanding of the interplay between theoretical knowledge and
professional practice, thereby creating a sense of coherence in medical
education.
Methods: This paper analyzes the data from interviews with 40 medical students
derived from a qualitative longitudinal research project in Norway from 2012
through 2018.
Results: Students characterize linking theoretical knowledge with professional
practice, experiencing authentic placement situations with real patients, and
discussing and critically reflecting on cases and professional practice with
experienced doctors as learning activities that transformed their understanding
of professional practice. These transformative learning activities influenced
students' perceptions of educational content and demands as being comprehensible,
manageable, and meaningful, which are the core components of "sensing coherence" 
in professional education. Moreover, experiencing a lack of knowledge in either
case-based learning on campus or when meeting patients in clinical placements
motivates students to pursue further theoretical studies.
Conclusion: Medical education includes rich opportunities to use transformative
learning activities both on campus and at clinical placement sites, but it is not
given that these types of learning activities are present in the teaching offered
at all the various learning sites; thus, enhanced awareness of why and how to
promote transformative learning is required among medical educators.

© 2020 Hatlevik and Hovdenak.

DOI: 10.2147/AMEP.S266960 
PMCID: PMC7608481
PMID: 33154694 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest for
this work.


217. BMJ Open. 2020 Nov 3;10(11):e040634. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-040634.

Acceptability of bisphosphonates among patients, clinicians and managers: a
systematic review and framework synthesis.

Paskins Z(1)(2), Crawford-Manning F(3)(2), Cottrell E(3), Corp N(3), Wright J(3),
Jinks C(3), Bishop S(4), Doyle A(5), Ong T(6), Gittoes N(7), Leonardi-Bee J(8),
Langley T(9), Horne R(10), Sahota O(11).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Keele University, Keele, UK z.paskins@keele.ac.uk.
(2)Haywood Academic Rheumatology Centre, Haywood Hospital, Stoke-on-Trent, UK.
(3)School of Medicine, Keele University, Keele, UK.
(4)Centre for Health Innovation, Leadership and Learning, University of
Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(5)Operations and Clinical Practice, Royal Osteoporosis Society, Bath, UK.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(7)Centre for Endocrinology Diabetes and Metabolism, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK.
(8)Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham,
UK.
(9)Division of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, UK.
(10)School of Pharmacy, University College London, London, UK.
(11)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, 
Nottingham, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the acceptability of different bisphosphonate regimens for 
the treatment of osteoporosis among patients, clinicians and managers, payers and
academics.
DESIGN: A systematic review of primary qualitative studies. Seven databases were 
searched from inception to July 2019. Screening, data extraction and quality
assessment of full-articles selected for inclusion were performed independently
by two authors. A framework synthesis was applied to extracted data based on the 
theoretical framework of acceptability (TFA). The TFA includes seven domains
relating to sense-making, emotions, opportunity costs, burden, perceived
effectiveness, ethicality and self-efficacy. Confidence in synthesis findings was
assessed.
SETTING: Any developed country healthcare setting.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients, healthcare professionals, managers, payers and academics.
INTERVENTION: Experiences and views of oral and intravenous bisphosphonates.
RESULTS: Twenty-five studies were included, mostly describing perceptions of oral
bisphosphonates. We identified, with high confidence, how patients and healthcare
professionals make sense (coherence) of bisphosphonates by balancing perceptions 
of need against concerns, how uncertainty prevails about bisphosphonate perceived
effectiveness and a number of individual and service factors that have potential 
to increase self-efficacy in recommending and adhering to bisphosphonates. We
identified, with moderate confidence, that bisphosphonate taking induces concern,
but has the potential to engender reassurance, and that both side effects and
special instructions for taking oral bisphosphonates can result in treatment
burden. Finally, we identified with low confidence that multimorbidity plays a
role in people's perception of bisphosphonate acceptability.
CONCLUSION: By using the lens of acceptability, our findings demonstrate with
high confidence that a theoretically informed, whole-system approach is necessary
to both understand and improve adherence. Clinicians and patients need supporting
to understand the need for bisphosphonates, and clinicians need to clarify to
patients what constitutes bisphosphonate treatment success. Further research is
needed to explore perspectives of male patients and those with multimorbidity
receiving bisphosphonates, and patients receiving intravenous treatment.
PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42019143526.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-040634 
PMCID: PMC7640526
PMID: 33148763  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


218. Eur J Ophthalmol. 2020 Nov 4:1120672120971549. doi: 10.1177/1120672120971549.
[Epub ahead of print]

Multimodal imaging of a retinal cavernous hemangioma.

Mazzini C(1)(2), Vicini G(1)(2), Nicolosi C(1)(2), Pieretti G(1)(2), Bacherini
D(1)(2), Giattini D(1)(2), Giansanti F(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Ocular Oncology, Neuromuscular and Sense Organs Department, Careggi
University Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(2)Eye Clinic, Neuromuscular and Sense Organs Department, Careggi University
Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, Psychology, Drug Research and Child Health
(NEUROFARBA), University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

PURPOSE: We describe the characteristics of an isolated retinal cavernous
hemangioma in a young female patient using multimodal imaging.
CASE DESCRIPTION: Fundus examination of the right eye showed a large vascular
mass, composed by clusters of dark red and dilated saccular angiomatous
formations with superficial whitish fibroglial tissue and hemorrhages, located in
the inferonasal peripheral retina, along the vascular arcade. On green-light
fundus autofluorescence the lesion appeared hypoautofluorescent, with moderately 
hyperautofluorescent areas. On multiColor imaging it showed mainly a green
pseudocolor, with knobby surface and well-defined irregular margins. Fundus
fluorescein angiography showed early hypofluorescence within the tumor mass and
late incomplete staining, without leakage. Ocular ultrasonography documented an
elevated well-defined hyperechogenic lesion, with high internal reflectivity,
without choroidal excavation, retinal detachment, or acoustic shadowing. Swept
source optical coherence tomography showed multilobulated cavernous formations,
varying in size, containing for the greatest part hyperreflective material,
within an interconnecting fibrous scaffold and with an overlying partially
adherent epiretinal membrane. Optical coherence tomography angiography documented
a few highly reflective, tortuous and abnormal branching veins extending into the
tumor mass, with a root-like appearance, and surrounding nodular changes,
corresponding to the angiomatous formations.
CONCLUSIONS: Different imaging modalities can be used in combination for a better
evaluation of the pathological features of this rare vascular tumor.

DOI: 10.1177/1120672120971549 
PMID: 33148021 


219. J Ophthalmic Vis Res. 2020 Oct 25;15(4):524-530. doi: 10.18502/jovr.v15i4.7787.
eCollection 2020 Oct-Dec.

Efficacy of Intravitreal Dexamethasone Implant in Different Patterns of Diabetic 
Macular Edema.

Furino C(1), Niro A(2), Reibaldi M(3), Boscia F(4), Alessio G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Science, Neuroscience and Sense Organs, Eye Clinic,
University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
(2)Eye Clinic, Hospital "S. G. MOSCATI", ASL TA, Taranto, Italy.
(3)Eye Clinic, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
(4)Department of Surgical, Microsurgical and Medical Sciences, Eye Clinic,
University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy.

Purpose: Different patterns of diabetic macular edema (DME) suggest different
pathogenesis and drug response. We evaluated the outcomes after intravitreal
dexamethasone (DEX) implant for DME with or without serous retinal detachment
(SRD).
Methods: In this retrospective study, 22 naïve patients (23 eyes) with DME who
underwent a single DEX implant were evaluated. Based on the optical coherence
tomographic pattern of DME, 12 eyes had a cystoid macular edema pattern (Group 1)
and 11 eyes had an SRD pattern (Group 2). The best-corrected visual acuity
(BCVA), central retinal thickness (СRТ), central retinal volume (CRV), SRD height
(SRDh), and intraocular pressure (IOP) were recorded before and at two and four
months after the treatment.
Results: There were no significant differences between the groups regarding
demographic, clinical data and outcomes at baseline. In Group 1, the CRT and CRV 
significantly decreased at two months (P = 0.002 and P = 0.01, respectively),
while the BCVA significantly improved at four months (P = 0.03). In Group 2, the 
CRT and CRV significantly improved (P < 0.01 and P ≤ 0.01, respectively) during
the follow-up period. At four months, both groups showed a recurrence of DME,
Group 1 in particular (two-month CRT reduction, -149 ± 127 µm vs four-month CRT
reduction, -72 ± 174 µm; P = 0.04). The mean reduction in CRV was significantly
different at four months (Group 1, -0.49 ± 1.7 mm 3 vs Group 2, -1.3 ± 1.3 mm 3 ;
P = 0.04). In Group 2, the SRDh significantly decreased at two (P = 0.01) and
four months (P = 0.01). Four cases with elevated IOP were managed.
Conclusion: DEX implants were found to be effective in different patterns of DME.
The SRD pattern may predict a longer-lasting morphologic efficacy.

Copyright © 2020 Furino et al.

DOI: 10.18502/jovr.v15i4.7787 
PMCID: PMC7591829
PMID: 33133444 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


220. Sex Reprod Healthc. 2020 Dec;26:100555. doi: 10.1016/j.srhc.2020.100555. Epub
2020 Sep 23.

The relationship between fear of childbirth and sense of coherence in women
expecting their first child.

Voogand M(1), Alehagen S(2), Salomonsson B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Vrinnevi Hospital, 603 79 Norrköping,
Sweden; Department of Health, Medicine and Caring Sciences, Faculty of Medicine
and Health, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden. Electronic address:
maria.voogand@regionostergotland.se.
(2)Department of Health, Medicine and Caring Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and
Health, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden. Electronic address:
siw.alehagen@liu.se.
(3)Department of Health, Medicine and Caring Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and
Health, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden. Electronic address:
birgitta.salomonsson@liu.se.

OBJECTIVE: The aim was to investigate fear of childbirth (FOC) and sense of
coherence (SOC), and their components in women expecting their first child.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study where 414 women answered the Wijma Delivery
Expectancy Questionnaire Version A and the Sense of Coherence Scale. Statistical 
analyses were performed.
RESULTS: The main results show that women with severe FOC reported lower SOC, and
all three components of SOC were lower in women with severe FOC.
Comprehensibility turned out to have a significant correlation with FOC.
Psychological problems before pregnancy were more common in women with severe FOC
and low SOC.
CONCLUSIONS: Women with severe FOC reported lower SOC and lower levels of each of
the following components: comprehensibility, manageability and meaningfulness.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.srhc.2020.100555 
PMID: 33130537 


221. HERD. 2021 Apr;14(2):337-349. doi: 10.1177/1937586720967347. Epub 2020 Oct 30.

Toward a Unified Language (and Application) of Salutogenic Design: An Opinion
Paper.

Mazzi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)GBBN Architects, Cincinnati, OH, USA.

This opinion paper posits that there is a misalignment of how the theory of
salutogenesis is defined by scholars and the way that salutogenesis is reflected 
in architectural practice. Many practitioners use this term to describe their
work without a clear understanding of the social theory behind it. A background
on the original theory, brief review of its subsequent development, and the
importance of stress in determining health are explored. Antonovsky, originator
of the salutogenesis theory, believed that health was represented by a spectrum
ranging from disease to wellness and that stress and an individual's ability to
respond to it determined where they would be on that spectrum. His work indicates
that one's resources determined the impact of a stressor. The elements Antonovsky
termed environmental generalized resistance resources (GRR) are considered
because they are within the purview of design practitioners to influence. While
Antonovsky's work became focused on an aspect of salutogenesis he termed sense of
coherence (SOC), he encouraged exploration of additional aspects. This article
proposes an expanded definition of salutogenesis that includes five aspects of
environmental GRR that can address or alleviate specific causes of stress-SOC,
biophilia, relaxation response, self-empowerment, and prospect and refuge. A more
specific language and a common, consistent way of understanding what makes an
environment salutogenic emerges with examples of each described. A common
language will bring consistency to design practice and make complex social
theories more accessible for practitioners, leading to them being more rigorously
and universally applied in design.

DOI: 10.1177/1937586720967347 
PMID: 33124468 


222. Front Psychol. 2020 Oct 6;11:552764. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.552764. eCollection 
2020.

Positive Psychological Factors Are Associated With Better Spiritual Well-Being
and Lower Distress in Individuals With Skin Diseases.

Iani L(1), Quinto RM(1), Porcelli P(2), Angeramo AR(1), Schiralli A(1), Abeni
D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Sciences, European University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Psychological, Health and Territorial Sciences, University of
"G. d'Annunzio" Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy.
(3)IDI-IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

In this study we examined whether aspects of positive functioning [reappraisal,
sense of coherence (SOC), and positivity] were associated with spiritual
well-being and psychological distress after controlling for negative functioning 
(skin-related symptoms, type of disease, and expressive suppression) in
individuals with skin diseases. We also examined whether negative functioning
aspects were linked to spiritual well-being and distress when controlling for
aspects of positive functioning. The study used a cross-sectional design with a
sample of 192 individuals with psoriasis and systemic sclerosis (SSc) (M age =
51.6 years, SD = 16.5). Two hierarchical multiple regressions were conducted to
determine whether spiritual well-being and psychological distress were accounted 
for by skin-related symptoms, type of disease, emotion regulation strategies,
SOC, and positivity. Positivity was the most important contributor to better
spiritual well-being, followed by both the comprehensibility/manageability and
meaningfulness SOC subscales, after controlling for the other variables. High
skin-related symptoms and expressive suppression were associated with lower
psychological distress, whereas high SOC and reappraisal correlated with higher
psychological distress. The findings of this study pave the way for further
research on how SOC and positivity may reduce the effects of both skin-related
symptoms and emotion dysregulation and facilitate spiritual well-being of
individuals with skin diseases. Interventions aimed to enhance inner resources of
these individuals and help them to find a meaning in their experience of skin
disease might reduce psychological distress and improve spiritual well-being. Our
findings suggest that healthcare professionals should consider positive
functioning aspects in future interventions for individuals with skin diseases.

Copyright © 2020 Iani, Quinto, Porcelli, Angeramo, Schiralli and Abeni.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.552764 
PMCID: PMC7573544
PMID: 33123038 


223. BMC Public Health. 2020 Oct 28;20(1):1619. doi: 10.1186/s12889-020-09673-7.

Supporting mental health service users to stop smoking: findings from a process
evaluation of the implementation of smokefree policies into two mental health
trusts.

Jones SE(1), Mulrine S(2), Clements H(3), Hamilton S(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health and Life Sciences, Teesside University, Middlesbrough, UK.
Susan.Jones@tees.ac.uk.
(2)School of Geography, Politics and Sociology, Newcastle University, Newcastle, 
UK.
(3)School of Health and Life Sciences, University of the West of Scotland, Ayr,
UK.
(4)School of Health and Life Sciences, Teesside University, Middlesbrough, UK.

BACKGROUND: Life expectancy is 10-20 years lower among people with a severe
mental health disorder. Most of these early deaths are due to chronic conditions,
including cardiovascular and respiratory diseases. Smoking is a major risk factor
for these conditions and introducing smokefree policies has been recommended to
mental health service providers in England by the National Institute for Health
and Care Excellence (NICE), in their Public Health Guideline 48: Smoking: acute, 
maternity and mental health services. This paper reports a process evaluation of 
introducing these policy recommendations, which were updated in 2013.
METHOD: Process data were collected through semi-structured interviews with staff
(n = 51), members of partnering organisations (n = 5), service users (n = 7) and 
carers (n = 2) between November 2016 - April 2017. Normalization Process Theory
(NPT) was used to design the data collection tools and analyse the data. A
framework approach was taken with the analysis, using the four concepts of NPT:
coherence, cognitive participation, collective action and reflexive monitoring.
RESULTS: The policy made sense to some staff, patients and carers (coherence) who
'bought-into' the idea (cognitive participation) but other participants
disagreed. Although smokefree policies were operationalised (collective action), 
sometimes they were opposed. Progress was made, especially in some units, but
continued to be resisted in others. Informal appraisal of progress (reflexive
monitoring) presented a varied picture.
CONCLUSION: Some progress has been made in terms of changing an entrenched,
smoking culture into one that is smokefree on Trust sites across the region.
Perseverance and resourcing over the long-term is required to establish a
non-smoking culture in on-site provision of mental health services.

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-020-09673-7 
PMCID: PMC7594274
PMID: 33115443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Neurophysiol. 2020 Dec 1;124(6):1959-1967. doi: 10.1152/jn.00562.2020. Epub
2020 Oct 28.

Feasibility and reproducibility of electroencephalography-based corticokinematic 
coherence.

Piitulainen H(1)(2), Illman M(1)(2)(3), Jousmäki V(2)(3), Bourguignon M(4)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Sport and Health Sciences, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä,
Finland.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Biomedical Engineering, Aalto University School
of Science, Espoo, Finland.
(3)Aalto NeuroImaging, MEG Core, Aalto University School of Science, Espoo,
Finland.
(4)Laboratoire de Cartographie fonctionnelle du Cerveau, Université libre de
Bruxelles Neuroscience Institute, Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Laboratoire Cognition Langage et Développement, Université libre de Bruxelles 
(ULB)-ULB Neuroscience Institute, Brussels, Belgium.
(6)Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, San Sebastian, Spain.

Corticokinematic coherence (CKC) is the phase coupling between limb kinematics
and cortical neurophysiological signals, reflecting cortical processing of
proprioceptive afference, and it is reproducible when estimated with
magnetoencephalography (MEG). However, feasibility and reproducibility of CKC
based on electroencephalography (EEG) is still unclear and is the primary object 
of the present report. Thirteen healthy right-handed volunteers (seven females,
21.7 ± 4.3 yr) participated in two combined MEG/EEG sessions 12.6 ± 1.3 mo apart.
Participants' dominant and nondominant index finger was continuously moved at 3
Hz for 4 min separately using a pneumatic-movement actuator. Coherence was
computed between finger acceleration and three derivations of EEG signals: 1)
average reference, 2) bipolar derivations, and 3) surface Laplacian. CKC strength
was defined as the peak coherence value at movement frequency.
Intraclass-correlation coefficient values (0.74-0.93) indicated excellent
intersession reproducibility for CKC strength for all derivations and moved
fingers. CKC strength obtained with EEG was approximately two times lower
compared with MEG, but the values were positively correlated across the
participants. CKC strength was significantly (P < 0.01) higher for bipolar
(session 1: 0.19 ± 0.09; session 2: 0.20 ± 0.10) and surface Laplacian (session
1: 0.22 ± 0.09; session 2: 0.21 ± 0.09) derivations than for the average
reference (session 1: 0.10 ± 0.04; session 2: 0.11 ± 0.05). We demonstrated that 
CKC is a feasible and reproducible tool to monitor proprioception using EEG
recordings, although the strength of CKC was twice lower for EEG compared with
MEG. Laplacian and bipolar (CP3-C1/CP3-C3 and CP4-C2/C4-FC2) EEG derivation(s)
are recommended for future research and clinical use of CKC method. NEW &
NOTEWORTHY The most important message in this report is that the corticokinematic
coherence (CKC) method is a feasible and reproducible tool to quantify, map, and 
follow cortical proprioceptive ("the movement sense") processing using EEG that
is more widely available for CKC recordings than previously used
magnetoencephalography designs, in basic research, but especially in clinical
environments. We provide useful recommendations for optimal EEG derivations for
cost-effective experimental designs, making it possible to scale up in sample
size in future studies.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00562.2020 
PMID: 33112711 


225. J Family Med Prim Care. 2020 Aug 25;9(8):4386-4390. doi:
10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_1129_19. eCollection 2020 Aug.

Mothers' sense of coherence and oral health-related quality of life in cleft lip 
and palate children visiting a private dental college: A Survey.

Sawai DS(1), Abdul NS(2), Rahman GS(3), Tabassum N(4), Kumar AP(5), Priyadarshni 
P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dentistry, Govt. Doon Medical College and Hospital. Dehardun,
Uttrakhand, India.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery and Diagnostic Sciences, Riyadh
Elm University, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Preventive Dentistry, DH Program Director, Riyadh Elm
University, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, College of Dentistry, Dar Al
Uloom University, Al Falah, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, SMBT Institutre of Dental
Sciences and Research, Dhamangaon, Ghoti, Maharashtra, India.
(6)Department of Prosthodontics, Patna Dental College and Hospital, Patna, Bihar,
India.

Background: In addition to an adjusting physical appearance, children with cleft 
lip and palate also deal with psychological and psychosocial limitation. Mothers'
sense of coherence (SOC) could be a psychosocial determinant of oral health
quality of life (OH-QoL) of cleft lip and palate patients. Hence, the present
study was done to assess the relationship of mothers' SOC on OH-QoL in cleft lip 
and palate patients.
Materials and Methods: The present cross-sectional questionnaire study was
conducted on mothers of cleft lip and palate children. The first part consisted
of demographic details. The second part of scale was the early childhood and oral
health impact scale (ECOHIS) which had a total 13 questions with responses on a
4-point Likert scale. The third part was to assess mothers' SOC using a short
version of SOC-13 consists of 13 items on a 7-point Likert scale. Chi-square test
was applied to assess the association between mothers' SOC, sociodemographic
characteristic, and children's OHRQoL. In the analysis, P < 0.05 was considered
significant.
Results: Out of 69% of low SOC population, 21.73% were rural, 20.39% were from
peri-urban, and 57.97% population was from urban areas. Out of 150 participants, 
2.40% in high ECOHIS were illiterate/primary school, "31.32% were high
school/intermediate/diploma had high ECOHIS while 66.26% were high
school/intermediate/diploma" had low ECOHIS, and 25.37% were
graduate/postgraduate. Mothers' education and locality were statistically
significant P < 0.001.
Conclusion: Action to enhance mothers' SOC might form part of oral health
promotion and help to improve the oral health quality of life of cleft lip and
palate patients.

Copyright: © 2020 Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care.

DOI: 10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_1129_19 
PMCID: PMC7586524
PMID: 33110865 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


226. Support Care Cancer. 2021 Jun;29(6):3191-3199. doi: 10.1007/s00520-020-05831-0.
Epub 2020 Oct 22.

Exploring the relationship between sexual function, sense of coherence, and
well-being in a sample of Iranian breast cancer survivors.

Lashani F(1), Rohani C(2)(3), Estebsari F(4), Nasiri M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Community Health Nursing, Student Research Committee, School of Nursing and
Midwifery, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Community Health Nursing Department, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Shahid
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Vali-Asr Avenue, Cross of Vali-Asr and
Neiaiesh Highway, Opposite to Rajaee Heart Hospital, Tehran, 1996835119, Iran.
cameliarohani@yahoo.com.
(3)Department of Health Care Sciences, Palliative Research Center, Ersta Sköndal 
Bräcke University College, Box 11189, Campus Ersta, Stigbergsgatan 30, SE-100 61,
Stockholm, Sweden. cameliarohani@yahoo.com.
(4)Community Health Nursing Department, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Shahid
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Vali-Asr Avenue, Cross of Vali-Asr and
Neiaiesh Highway, Opposite to Rajaee Heart Hospital, Tehran, 1996835119, Iran.
(5)Nursing Department, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

PURPOSE: This study was aimed at exploring the type and role of relationships
between sexual function, sense of coherence (SOC), and well-being in a sample of 
Iranian breast cancer survivors.
METHODS: In this cross-sectional study with correlational design, data were
collected from 181 survivors by consecutive sampling. They answered demographic
and clinical information sheet, the SOC scale, the Female Sexual Function Index
(FSFI), and the Health Index (HI). The data were analyzed using SPSS version 20.
RESULTS: The mean age of survivors was 47.04 ± 9.05 years. Most survivors were
menopausal (51.9%) and underwent mastectomy (69.1%), and 12 months or more had
passed since their treatment ended (71.2%). Sexual function was positively
correlated with the level of SOC (r = 0.20) and the HI (r = 0.33). Also, there
was a positive correlation between the level of SOC and the HI (r = 0.51). The
results of logistic regression analyses showed the protective role of the SOC
(OR: 0.95; 95% CI: 0.92-0.97) and the HI (OR: 0.87; 95% CI: 0.79-0.96) for
women's sexual function. According to these results, the mediating role of the
SOC was assessed between the variables of the HI and the FSFI. The SOC revealed a
complete mediating effect in this relationship.
CONCLUSIONS: The mediator role of the SOC between survivors' well-being and their
sexual function helps nurses and clinicians to understand how the SOC can be used
as a screening test to detect survivors who are at risk of sexual problems and to
plan for salutogenic interventions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00520-020-05831-0 
PMID: 33090269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


227. BMC Geriatr. 2020 Oct 19;20(1):411. doi: 10.1186/s12877-020-01810-6.

Supporting the mobilization of health assets among older community dwellers
residing in senior-only households in Singapore: a qualitative study.

Seah B(1), Espnes GA(2), Ang ENK(3), Lim JY(3), Kowitlawakul Y(3), Wang W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Alice Lee Centre for Nursing Studies, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Clinical Research Centre, Block MD11, Level 2, 
10 Medical Drive, Singapore, 117597, Singapore. nurseah@nus.edu.sg.
(2)Center for Health Promotion Research, Department of Public Health and Nursing,
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Postbox 8905, N-7491, Trondheim, Norway.
(3)Alice Lee Centre for Nursing Studies, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Clinical Research Centre, Block MD11, Level 2, 
10 Medical Drive, Singapore, 117597, Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Care activities provided by community health practitioners for older 
adults primarily focused on disease prevention and management. However, healthy
longevity can go beyond disease prevention and management and promote greater
well-being by tapping into the accrual of resources that older adults possess
using the salutogenic approach. This study explored how health resources are used
among older adults who are residing in senior-only households to promote and
maintain health, with the intent of providing insights into how community health 
practitioners can support these older adults via asset-based strategies.
METHODS: We adopted a descriptive qualitative study design using focus group
discussions. Twenty-seven older adults who either lived alone or with their
spouses were purposively sampled from an elderly populated residential estate in 
Singapore. Six focus group discussions, conducted from December 2016 to May 2017,
were audio-recorded, transcribed, and analyzed using thematic analysis.
RESULTS: The themes that emerged were 'tapping on internal self-care repository',
'maintaining and preserving informal social support', and 'enabling self by using
environmental aids', and an eco-map of aging assets was used to capture an
overview of internal and external resources. With the repository of personal
strengths, knowledge, and experiences, these older adults were generally
resourceful in navigating around their resource-rich environments to cope with
everyday life stressors and promote health. However, they were occasionally
limited by individual factors that affected their comprehension, access,
maintenance, and utilization of resources.
CONCLUSION: The eco-map of aging assets can be used as an assessment framework by
community health practitioners to recognize, consider, and build a repertoire of 
resources among these older adults. It serves as a gentle reminder to adopt an
ecological approach in considering and tapping into older adults' wide-ranging
personal, social, and environmental resources. Community health practitioners can
support resource integration as resource facilitators via cognitive, behavioral, 
and motivational salutogenic pathways to overcome resource mobilization barriers 
faced by older adults. Such an approach helps older adults to find their internal
capabilities and abilities to know who, where, what, and how to seek external
resources to identify solutions, creating the intrinsic value to sustain their
actions on resource utility.

DOI: 10.1186/s12877-020-01810-6 
PMCID: PMC7574307
PMID: 33076833  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Disabil Rehabil. 2020 Oct 18:1-11. doi: 10.1080/09638288.2020.1834627. [Epub
ahead of print]

Global health and rehabilitation education in Canada: a qualitative analysis of
experiences and perspectives of educators.

Alias A(1), Rideout M(1), You R(1), Lencucha R(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Physical and Occupational Therapy, Faculty of Medicine, McGill
University, Montreal, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Rehabilitation practice is increasingly tied to global trends. First,
healthcare services are increasingly tailored to be patient-centered, requiring
knowledge of sociocultural contexts and experiences of a diverse patient
population. Second, non-communicable diseases and morbidity stemming from
infectious diseases are creating greater needs for rehabilitation services in
countries facing this double burden of disease. Third, globalization continues to
shape the risk factors for disease and disability and influences the type of
services accessible and the financing and management of such services. Given this
context, there is a critical need to examine how global health (GH) is approached
in rehabilitation curricula. How students learn about these various dynamics will
impact their ability to practice in this environment and best meet the needs of
the patients and populations they are caring for.
OBJECTIVES: This study explores how university-level Canadian occupational and
physical therapy educators understand GH within their academic and clinical
practices.
METHODS: The project followed a qualitative design. Semi-structured interviews
were conducted with participants (n = 12; randomized purposive sampling was
used). A deductive and inductive thematic analysis was performed to describe the 
participants perspectives on and practices of GH education in rehabilitation
education programs.
FINDINGS: There was an overall coherence between the literature and the
participant's views of the constituent elements of GH. Participants viewed GH as 
a framework to broaden the clinical training of students by encouraging a
critical "clinical toolbox" via themes of structural competency, cultural
sensitivity, and a sense of global citizenship and stewardship. However, GH was
also described by participants as being implicitly present in the curriculum due 
to ambiguities regarding the scope of GH, seen as a key obstacle in the
integration of GH education in rehabilitation programs.
INTERPRETATION: Despite the growing interest and relevance of GH, there is a
noteworthy absence of GH education guidelines. There is a need to uncover the
scope and underpinnings of GH and to outline rehabilitation-oriented GH
competencies as per the positive value of GH attributed by the educators to the
training of our healthcare workforce.IMPLICATIONS FOR REHABILITATIONGlobal health
is seen by a sample of educators to provide rehabilitation students with a
critical and holistic "clinical toolkit" by introducing themes of structural
competency, cultural sensitivity and awareness, and global stewardship, enabling 
them to become good global clinicians and global citizens;The increased interest 
in global health throughout academic curricula presents new challenges for
educators and students, specifically relating to understanding the mission and
aims of this field. There is a need to clarify the notion and field of global
health and how it complements clinical training within rehabilitation
programs;There is a need to advance the literature on global health in
rehabilitation by exploring what competencies are seen to be relevant to the
field and practice of rehabilitation.

DOI: 10.1080/09638288.2020.1834627 
PMID: 33073629 


229. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2020 Oct 17. pii: glaa269. doi:
10.1093/gerona/glaa269. [Epub ahead of print]

Retinal Vascular Density on Optical Coherence Tomography Angiography and
Age-related Central and Peripheral Hearing Loss in a Southern Italian Older
Population.

Sardone R(1), Sborgia G(2), Niro A(3), Giuliani G(2), Pascale A(2), Puzo P(2),
Guerra V(1), Castellana F(1), Lampignano L(1), Donghia R(1), Bortone I(1), Zupo
R(1), Griseta C(1), Logroscino G(4)(5), Lozupone M(4), Giannelli G(1), Panza
F(1), Boscia F(2), Alessio G(2), Quaranta N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Unit, "Salus in Apulia Study", National Institute of
Gastroenterology "Saverio de Bellis", Research Hospital, Castellana Grotte, Bari,
Italy.
(2)Eye Clinic, Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Neuroscience and Sense
Organs, University of Bari "Aldo Moro", Bari, Italy.
(3)Eye Clinic, Hospital "S. G. MOSCATI, " ASL TA, Taranto, Italy.
(4)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Neuroscience and Sense Organs ,
University of Bari "Aldo Moro", Bari, Italy.
(5)Unit of Neurodegenerative Disease, Department of Clinical Research in
Neurology, University of Bari "Aldo Moro" at "Pia Fondazione Card. G. Panico",
Tricase, Lecce, Italy.
(6)Otolaryngology Unit, Department of Basic Medical Science, Neuroscience and
Sense Organs, University of Bari Aldo Moro, Bari, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Age-related hearing loss (ARHL) and retinal vessel changes have both 
been associated to neurodegeneration/dementia, suggesting a possible link between
these two conditions in older age. We aimed to determine whether superficial and 
deep vascular density (SVD and DVD) of the capillary plexi of macular vasculature
can be associated with peripheral ARHL and age-related central auditory central
processing (CAPD).
METHODS: We analyzed data on 886 older participants (65 years+, age range:65-92
years) in the cross-sectional population-based Salus in Apulia Study. Optical
coherence tomography angiography (OCT-A) was used to measure SVD and DVD of the
capillary plexi of the macula at the 3-mm circle area centered on the fovea
(whole retina), the parafoveal quadrant, and foveal quadrant. Disabling
peripheral ARHL was defined as >40 dB HL of pure tone average on the frequencies 
from 0.5, 1, 2, and 4 KHz in the better ear, and age-related CAPD as <50% at the 
Synthetic Sentence Identification with Ipsilateral Competitive Message test in at
least one ear.
RESULTS: DVD at the whole retina and at the parafoveal quadrant were inversely
associated only with age-related CAPD [odds ratio (OR):0.93; 95% confidence
interval (CI): 0.88-0.96 and OR:0.94; 95 CI:0.90-0.99, respectively]. No further 
associations with peripheral ARHL were evident.
CONCLUSIONS: Retinal vasculature is associated with central auditory processing
pathology, possibly playing an important role in early detection and
intervention. The association of retinal vascular density with age-related CAPD
may bring us a further step forward in understanding the biological mechanisms
underlying the links between neurodegeneration/dementia and ARHL.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/glaa269 
PMID: 33064801 


230. J Clin Nurs. 2021 Jan;30(1-2):161-173. doi: 10.1111/jocn.15532. Epub 2020 Nov 22.

A qualitative study of long-term ICU patients' inner strength and willpower:
Family and health professionals as a health-promoting resource.

Alexandersen I(1), Haugdahl HS(1)(2), Paulsby TE(1), Lund SB(1), Stjern B(1),
Eide R(3), Haugan G(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Nursing, NTNU Norwegian University of Science 
and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
(2)Nord-Trøndelag Hospital Trust, Levanger, Norway.
(3)St. Olav University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.
(4)Nord University, Faculty of nursing and health sience, Levanger, Norway.

AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: To explore how the presence of family and health
professionals influences long-term critically ill patients' inner strength and
willpower as an incitement to keep fighting for recovery.
BACKGROUND: This study reports long-term critically ill patients' experiences of 
family and health professionals as health-promoting resources in terms of
significance for their inner strength and willpower. Earlier research on this
topic is scarce.
DESIGN: A qualitative, hermeneutic-phenomenological approach, within the context 
of Antonovsky's salutogenic theory.
METHODS: Seventeen long-term critically ill patients were interviewed once, at
6-18 months after ICU discharge. The consolidated criteria for reporting
qualitative research (COREQ) were used (Supplementary File 1).
RESULTS: Four main themes identified how family and staff promoted and challenged
the patient's inner strength and willpower: (a) the importance of family and
friends; my family was surrounding me, (b) staff contributions, (c) challenges to
inner strength and willpower in relation to family and (d) loneliness and
indifferent care.
CONCLUSION: This study brings new knowledge from the long-term critically ill
patient's view about the impact of family, friends and nurses on the patient's
inner strength and willpower. All impact is experienced positively and
negatively.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: Knowledge from the long-term critically ill
patient's view is vital in nurse-patient interactions to facilitate liberation of
inner strength and willpower.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jocn.15532 
PMID: 33058361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Codas. 2020 Oct 12;32(5):e20190071. doi: 10.1590/2317-1782/20202019071.
eCollection 2020.

Sense of Coherence and the fear of public speaking in university students.

[Article in English, Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the
publisher]

Pantuza JJ(1), Alexandre IO(1), Medeiros AM(1), Marinho ACF(1), Teixeira LC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais - UFMG - Belo Horizonte (MG), Brasil.

PURPOSE: To test the association between the Sense of Coherence (SOC) and the
fear of public speaking in university students.
METHOD: Cross-sectional study was carried out with a sample of 1124 undergraduate
students of a Brazilian public university. An online questionnaire was used
divided into three blocks: the first evaluated the sociodemographic data and the 
somatic symptoms of the fear of public speaking; the second evaluated the SOC,
through the SOC-13 questionnaire; and the third was composed by the Scale for
Self-Assessment in Public Speaking (SSPS), with questions that point out
cognitive aspects of this activity. The students were divided into two groups
(high SOC and low SOC) through the Two-step Cluster analysis. Data were analyzed 
descriptively and by the Mann-Whitney test and bi and multivariate logistic
regression models, with significance set at 5%.
RESULTS: The students who reported not being afraid to speak in public were more 
likely to belong to the high SOC group (OR = 3.19, 95% CI = 2.30-4.42). Students 
from the high SOC group self-assessed more positively on the SSPS scale (p
<0.001).
CONCLUSION: College students over 30 years old, on the second half of graduation,
with breathing discomfort, who do not report fear of public speaking and who
perceive themselves more positively for public speaking, they have the highest
SOC. Thus, it is observed the importance of considering the SOC as an important
coping resource, given the great interference of emotional aspects in public
speech.

Publisher: Testar a associação entre o Senso de Coerência (SOC) e o medo de falar
em público em universitários.Estudo transversal, com amostra de 1.124 estudantes 
de cursos de graduação de uma universidade pública brasileira. Foi utilizado
questionário online dividido em três blocos: o primeiro avaliou os dados
sociodemográficos e os sintomas somáticos do medo de falar em público; o segundo 
avaliou o SOC, por meio do questionário SOC-13; e o terceiro foi composto pela
Escala para Autoavaliação ao Falar em Público (SSPS), que norteia aspectos
cognitivos dessa atividade. Os universitários foram divididos em dois grupos (SOC
alto e SOC baixo) por meio da análise de Cluster de dois passos. Os dados foram
analisados de forma descritiva e por meio do teste de Mann-Whitney e modelos de
regressão logística bi e multivariado, com significância de 5%.Os universitários 
que relataram não ter medo de falar em público apresentaram mais chance de
pertencer ao grupo SOC alto (OR=3,19, IC95%=2,30-4,42). Os universitários do
grupo SOC alto se autoavaliaram mais positivamente na escala SSPS
(p<0.001).Universitários com mais de 30 anos, na segunda metade da graduação, das
áreas da Saúde e Exatas, com sintoma de respiração ofegante, que não relatam medo
de falar em público e que se autopercebem mais positivamente para falar em
público, apresentam o SOC mais alto. Diante do estudo, observa-se a importância
de se considerar o SOC como um recurso de enfrentamento importante, tendo em
vista a grande interferência dos aspectos emocionais na fala em público.
DOI: 10.1590/2317-1782/20202019071 
PMID: 33053083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Crit Care Med. 2020 Dec;48(12):e1218-e1225. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000004628.

Effect of Nurse-Led Consultations on Post-Traumatic Stress and Sense of Coherence
in Discharged ICU Patients With Clinically Relevant Post-Traumatic Stress
Symptoms-A Randomized Controlled Trial.

Valsø Å(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9)(10)(11), Rustøen T(2)(3), Småstuen MC(2)(4),
Ekeberg Ø(5), Skogstad L(6)(7), Schou-Bredal I(3)(8), Myhren H(9), Sunde
K(10)(11), Tøien K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Emergencies and Critical Care, Department of Postoperative and
Intensive Care, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Division of Emergencies and Critical Care, Department of Research and
Development, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Health and Society, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway.
(4)Department of Public Health, Oslo Metropolitan University, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Division of Mental Health and Addiction, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway.
(6)Department of Research, Sunnaas Rehabilitation Hospital, Bjørnemyr, Norway.
(7)Faculty of Health Sciences, Oslo Metropolitan University, Oslo, Norway.
(8)Unit for Breast and Endocrine surgery, Division of Cancer Medicine, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(9)Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(10)Division of Emergencies and Critical Care, Department of Anesthesiology, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(11)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the effect of nurse-led consultations on reducing
post-traumatic stress symptoms and increasing sense of coherence in discharged
ICU patients with clinically relevant post-traumatic stress symptoms and to
identify variables associated with symptoms 12 months later.
DESIGN: A pragmatic nonblinded randomized controlled trial.
SETTINGS: Five surgical and medical ICUs at Oslo University Hospital.
PATIENTS: Adult patients treated in the ICU greater than or equal to 24 hours
were screened with Post-Traumatic Stress Scale 10 intensive part B after ICU
discharge. Those scoring greater than or equal to 25 were included in the study.
INTERVENTION: Patients randomized to intervention group were offered three
nurse-led consultations within 2 months, and patients in the control group
received standard care.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Sense of Coherence Scale 13 and Post-Traumatic
Stress Scale 10 intensive part B were completed after inclusion, and reevaluated 
after 3, 6, and 12 months. Linear mixed model for repeated measures and linear
regression analyses were performed. Among 523 screened patients, 111 and 113 were
randomized to intervention group and control group, respectively. Mean
Post-Traumatic Stress Scale 10 intensive part B score was 37 (±10) before
randomization. No differences in post-traumatic stress symptoms or sense of
coherence were found between intervention group versus control group, with a mean
Post-Traumatic Stress Scale 10 intensive part B score 39 (95% CI, 37-41) versus
37 (95% CI, 35-39), 32 (95% CI, 28-35) versus 32 (95% CI, 29-35), 31 (95% CI,
28-34) versus 30 (95% CI, 27-33), and 31 (95% CI, 28-34) versus 29 (95% CI,
26-33) at baseline, 3, 6, and 12 months, respectively. There was a significantly 
reduced Post-Traumatic Stress Scale 10 intensive part B score for both groups
during the year (p = 0.001). Low sense of coherence, pain, and previous
psychiatric problems were associated with increased level of post-traumatic
stress symptoms at 12 months.
CONCLUSIONS: Nurse-led consultations did not reveal any significant effect on
post-traumatic stress symptoms or sense of coherence after ICU discharge in
patients with clinically relevant symptoms.

DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000004628 
PMID: 33048906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Int J Nurs Pract. 2021 Jun;27(3):e12895. doi: 10.1111/ijn.12895. Epub 2020 Oct
12.

Social networking sites: Can midwives and nurses working with adolescent mothers 
harness their potential value?

Nolan SJ(1), Hendricks J(1), Williamson M(1), Ferguson SL(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, Midwifery and Social Sciences, Central Queensland
University, Burleigh Waters, Australia.
(2)Faculty of Health, University of Canberra, Canberra, Australia.

AIM: This paper aims to discuss social networking sites as potentially
salutogenic, culturally relevant extensions to maternity care provision for
adolescent mothers.
BACKGROUND: Studies report that online networking may enhance social capital, a
concept linked to enhanced well-being, particularly for marginalized individuals.
Improving outcomes for adolescent mothers is an ongoing global strategy; thus,
this paper has relevance for all professionals involved in their care.
DESIGN: This is a discussion paper.
DATA SOURCES: This paper draws on the authors' research and is supported by
literature and theory. Key terms and Boolean operators were used to identifiy
English-language papers published in January 1995 to January 2019 in nine
databases and Google Scholar databases.
IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING: Despite limited evidence specific to adolescent
mothers, contextual studies suggest that social networking sites may enhance
well-being. Nurses and midwives need to understand adolescent mothers' use of
online networks to aid development of innovative, health-enhancing care
strategies using adolescent-familiar modalities.
CONCLUSION: This paper highlights the need for further research regarding the
value of professional engagement in online networks to enhance an adolescent's
transition to motherhood.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ijn.12895 
PMID: 33047440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Saf Sci. 2021 Jan;133:105033. doi: 10.1016/j.ssci.2020.105033. Epub 2020 Oct 7.

Sense of coherence, engagement, and work environment as precursors of
psychological distress among non-health workers during the COVID-19 pandemic in
Spain.

Ruiz-Frutos C(1)(2), Ortega-Moreno M(3), Allande-Cussó R(4), Ayuso-Murillo D(5), 
Domínguez-Salas S(6), Gómez-Salgado J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sociology, Social Work and Public Health, Faculty of Labour
Sciences, University of Huelva, 21007 Huelva, Spain.
(2)Safety and Health Postgraduate Programme, Universidad Espíritu Santo, 092301
Guayaquil, Ecuador.
(3)Department of Economy, University of Huelva, 21007 Huelva, Spain.
(4)Department of Nursing, Faculty of Nursing, Physiotherapy, and Podiatry.
University of Seville, Seville 41009, Spain.
(5)General Council of Nursing, Madrid 28023, Spain.
(6)Department of Psychology, Universidad Loyola Andalucía, Dos Hermanas, 41704
Sevilla, Spain.

Background: The interrelationship between the sense of coherence, work
environment, work engagement, and psychological distress have particular interest
in non-health workers who carried out essential activities during the COVID-19
pandemic.
Objective: To assess the effects of the COVID-19 on the physical and mental
health of non-health workers.
Design: Observational descriptive cross-sectional study.
Data sources: 1089 questionnaires have been analysed. Engagement (UWES-9), sense 
of coherence (SOC-13), mental health (Goldberg GHQ-12), demographic data,
perception of health and stress and work environment were assessed.
Results: At low levels of engagement, the percentage of distress is higher
(77.9%). Low levels of sense of coherence correspond to the highest percentages
of distress (86.3%). The 94.1% believe it necessary for professionals and
volunteers involved in COVID-19 to receive psychological support. Low
comprehensibility is mediated by the perception of stress; if the perception is
low, comprehensibility is modulated by the level of significance; if it is low,
it generates 95.9% of distress.
Conclusion: The interrelationship between the sense of coherence, work
environment, work engagement, and psychological distress have particular interest
in non-health workers who carried out essential activities during the COVID-19
pandemic. Almost all respondents believed that professionals and volunteers
involved in COVID-19 should receive psychological support. This may be an
indicator of the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on workers' mental health.

© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ssci.2020.105033 
PMCID: PMC7539829
PMID: 33046949 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


235. Neuroimage. 2021 Feb 15;227:117436. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117436. Epub
2020 Oct 8.

Crowdsourcing neuroscience: Inter-brain coupling during face-to-face interactions
outside the laboratory.

Dikker S(1), Michalareas G(2), Oostrik M(3), Serafimaki A(4), Kahraman HM(5),
Struiksma ME(6), Poeppel D(7).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck - NYU Center for Language, Music and Emotion, New York, USA;
Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, USA; Department of
Clinical Psychology, Free University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Electronic address: suzanne.dikker@nyu.edu.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics, Frankfurt, Germany.
(3)DIKKER+OOSTRIK, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)The American College of Greece, Athens, Greece.
(5)Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, USA.
(6)Department of Language and Communication, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.
(7)Max Planck - NYU Center for Language, Music and Emotion, New York, USA; Max
Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics, Frankfurt, Germany; Department of
Psychology, New York University, New York, USA.

When we feel connected or engaged during social behavior, are our brains in fact 
"in sync" in a formal, quantifiable sense? Most studies addressing this question 
use highly controlled tasks with homogenous subject pools. In an effort to take a
more naturalistic approach, we collaborated with art institutions to crowdsource 
neuroscience data: Over the course of 5 years, we collected electroencephalogram 
(EEG) data from thousands of museum and festival visitors who volunteered to
engage in a 10-min face-to-face interaction. Pairs of participants with various
levels of familiarity sat inside the Mutual Wave Machine-an artistic
neurofeedback installation that translates real-time correlations of each pair's 
EEG activity into light patterns. Because such inter-participant EEG correlations
are prone to noise contamination, in subsequent offline analyses we computed
inter-brain coupling using Imaginary Coherence and Projected Power Correlations, 
two synchrony metrics that are largely immune to instantaneous, noise-driven
correlations. When applying these methods to two subsets of recorded data with
the most consistent protocols, we found that pairs' trait empathy, social
closeness, engagement, and social behavior (joint action and eye contact)
consistently predicted the extent to which their brain activity became
synchronized, most prominently in low alpha (~7-10 Hz) and beta (~20-22 Hz)
oscillations. These findings support an account where shared engagement and joint
action drive coupled neural activity and behavior during dynamic, naturalistic
social interactions. To our knowledge, this work constitutes a first
demonstration that an interdisciplinary, real-world, crowdsourcing neuroscience
approach may provide a promising method to collect large, rich datasets
pertaining to real-life face-to-face interactions. Additionally, it is a
demonstration of how the general public can participate and engage in the
scientific process outside of the laboratory. Institutions such as museums,
galleries, or any other organization where the public actively engages out of
self-motivation, can help facilitate this type of citizen science research, and
support the collection of large datasets under scientifically controlled
experimental conditions. To further enhance the public interest for the
out-of-the-lab experimental approach, the data and results of this study are
disseminated through a website tailored to the general public
(wp.nyu.edu/mutualwavemachine).

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117436 
PMID: 33039619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
have no competing interests to declare.


236. Women Birth. 2020 Oct 7. pii: S1871-5192(20)30339-5. doi:
10.1016/j.wombi.2020.09.021. [Epub ahead of print]

The childbirth experience: A systematic review of predictors and outcomes.

McKelvin G(1), Thomson G(2), Downe S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing and Midwifery, Edge Hill University, UK. Electronic
address: fenechg@edgehill.ac.uk.
(2)School of Community Health and Midwifery, University of Central Lancashire,
UK.

BACKGROUND: Birth is often viewed as a pathological event, consequently, there
has been an increase in literature focusing on predictors, experience and
implications of traumatic childbirth and childbirth-related posttraumatic stress.
However, to fully understand childbirth experiences a salutogenic perspective is 
required. This enables an understanding of what facilitates a positive childbirth
experience besides what places women at risk of experiencing traumatic
childbirth.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the psychosocial factors that could contribute to or be
influenced by women's subjective accounts of childbirth.
METHOD: An in-depth literature search across four databases was undertaken.
Quality appraisal based on internal and external validity was conducted and a
combined numerical summary and categorical description were undertaken.
FINDINGS: Nineteen papers were included in the review and the variables grouped
into three categories. The variables relate to 'Measures of labour and birth
experience' (discussing the impact of events and perceptions during labour and
birth). The second category discusses how 'support and relationships' can
potentially shape the birth experience or be altered by it and finally,
'Psychological variables: influence and impact' is examined extensively.
DISCUSSION: The results of the review highlight significant contradictory
evidence of what influences birth experiences. The findings confirm the dearth of
available literature concerning positive birth experiences and most variables
identified were pathogenic. This review suggests that such factors for PTSD may
differ from those that influence birth experiences and should be examined
separately. An enhanced understanding of the range of experiences is required to 
support women's rights in achieving a positive birth.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wombi.2020.09.021 
PMID: 33039281 


237. J Psychiatr Res. 2021 Jan;132:23-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2020.09.029. Epub 
2020 Sep 30.

Peritraumatic reactions during the COVID-19 pandemic - The contribution of
posttraumatic growth attributed to prior trauma.

Hamam AA(1), Milo S(2), Mor I(3), Shaked E(4), Eliav AS(5), Lahav Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational Therapy, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Israel. Electronic address: abuhamam@mail.tau.ac.il.
(2)Department of Occupational Therapy, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Israel. Electronic address: Shaimilo93@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Occupational Therapy, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Israel. Electronic address: inbarmorot@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Occupational Therapy, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Israel. Electronic address: elitshaked@mail.tau.ac.il.
(5)Department of Occupational Therapy, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Israel. Electronic address: ayala13467@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Occupational Therapy, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Israel. Electronic address: yaellah1@tauex.tau.ac.il.

Trauma survivors who suffer from posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms
may be particularly vulnerable when facing the COVID-19 pandemic. Yet trauma
exposure may also lead to salutogenic outcomes, known as posttraumatic growth
(PTG). Nevertheless, the implications of PTG attributed to prior trauma, for
trauma survivors' adjustment when facing additional stressors, are unclear.
Addressing this gap, 528 Israeli trauma survivors were assessed for PTG and PTSD 
symptoms attributed to prior trauma, as well as peritraumatic stress symptoms
related to the pandemic, as part of an online survey. Analyses revealed that
being younger, female, quarantined, negatively self-rating one's health status,
and suffering from PTSD symptoms were associated with elevated peritraumatic
stress symptoms. Furthermore, PTG attributed to prior trauma made a significant
contribution in explaining elevated intrusion, avoidance, and hyperarousal
symptoms. The present results point to the need for clinicians to take into
account reports of PTG attributed to prior trauma when treating trauma survivors 
during the current pandemic.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2020.09.029 
PMCID: PMC7525333
PMID: 33038562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


238. ESC Heart Fail. 2020 Oct 9. doi: 10.1002/ehf2.13046. [Epub ahead of print]

Exploring correlates of improved depression symptoms and quality of life
following tai chi exercise for patients with heart failure.

Luberto CM(1), Coey CA(2), Davis RB(3), Wayne PM(2), Crute S(1), Yeh GY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical
School, 100 Cambridge St, 16th Floor, Boston, MA, 02114, USA.
(2)Department of Preventive Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital/Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of General Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center/Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

AIMS: Tai chi exercise has been shown in a prior randomized controlled trial to
improve depression symptoms and quality of life (QoL) in patients with heart
failure (HF), but correlates of these improvements are not well known. The
purpose of this secondary analysis was to explore whether tai chi is associated
with improvements in biopsychosocial and behavioural measures and whether such
improvements are correlated with improved depression and QoL.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Participants were n = 100 adults with chronic systolic HF
(mean age = 67.4, SD = 12.0; 64% male; 96% White; New York Heart Association
class = 1-3) randomized to a 12 week tai chi exercise intervention or health
education control. Constructs of interest included social support, exercise
self-efficacy, activity engagement, sense of coherence, and inflammatory
biomarkers. Tai chi was associated with increased everyday activity engagement
compared with the health education group (P < 0.05), but there were no group
differences in social support or sense of coherence. Among tai chi participants, 
improved self-efficacy was correlated with QoL (r = 31, P = 0.05), and there was 
a trend toward improved depression symptoms and social support (r = -0.22,
P = 0.13). Among all participants, controlling for intervention group, improved
sense of coherence, and inflammation (C-reactive protein) were associated with
improved depression symptoms, and improved self-efficacy, sense of coherence, and
frequency of activity engagement were associated with improved QoL.
CONCLUSIONS: Tai chi exercise promotes inter-related psychosocial improvements
for patients with HF. A range of biopsychosocial and behavioural variables are
relevant to mood management in patients with HF.

© 2020 The Authors. ESC Heart Failure published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on
behalf of the European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1002/ehf2.13046 
PMCID: PMC7754947
PMID: 33034157 


239. Ann Epidemiol. 2020 Dec;52:35-41. doi: 10.1016/j.annepidem.2020.09.016. Epub 2020
Oct 6.

Role of psychosocial factors in long-term adherence to secondary prevention
measures after myocardial infarction: a longitudinal analysis.

Nachshol M(1), Lurie I(2), Benyamini Y(3), Goldbourt U(1), Gerber Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, School of Public Health,
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, School of Public Health,
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel; Department of
Psychiatry, Sackler Medical School, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel;
Shalvata Mental Health Centre, Hod Hasharon, Israel.
(3)Bob Shapell School of Social Work, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, School of Public Health,
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Electronic
address: yarivg@tauex.tau.ac.il.

PURPOSE: Psychosocial factors have been linked to myocardial infarction (MI)
outcomes. Whether psychosocial factors affect post-MI long-term adherence to
secondary prevention recommendations remains uncertain.
METHODS: Patients ≤65 years (n = 616) were assessed for optimism, perceived
social support (PSS), sense of coherence (SOC), anxiety, and depression at
initial hospitalization for acute MI (1992-1993). Adherence to secondary
prevention measures was recorded in interviews 3-6 months, 1-2, 5, and
10-13 years after MI. Prevention score (proportion of recommendations met) was
developed based on: (1) medication adherence; (2) exercise; (3) nonsmoking; (4)
healthy diet; (5) maintaining recommended body weight. Associations between
psychosocial factors and prevention scores were estimated using Generalized
Estimating Equation models. The role of the prevention score in long-term
survival was assessed using time-dependent Cox regression analysis.
RESULTS: Average follow-up prevention scores ranged from 0.70 to 0.80 (SD,
≈0.20). After multivariable adjustment, PSS (β = 0.087, P = .002, per 1 SD
increase) and SOC (β = 0.082, P = .006, per 1 SD increase) were positively
associated with secondary prevention adherence. The prevention score predicted
survival over 23-year follow-up (adjusted hazard ratio = 0.79; 95% CI: 0.68-0.91,
per 1 SD increase).
CONCLUSIONS: Psychosocial factors following MI, particularly PSS and SOC, were
associated with long-term adherence to secondary prevention measures.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.annepidem.2020.09.016 
PMID: 33031935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Pain Med. 2021 Feb 4;22(1):100-111. doi: 10.1093/pm/pnaa320.

Are Illness Perceptions Associated with Pain and Disability in Complex Regional
Pain Syndrome? A Cross-Sectional Study.

Antunovich DR(1), Horne JC(2), Tuck NL(2)(3)(4), Bean DJ(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological Medicine, The University of Auckland, Auckland,
New Zealand.
(2)The Auckland Regional Pain Service, Auckland District Health Board, Auckland, 
New Zealand.
(3)Health and Rehabilitation Research Institute, Auckland University of
Technology, Auckland, New Zealand.
(4)Chronic Pain Service, Department of Anaesthesia and Perioperative Medicine,
Waitematā District Health Board, Auckland, New Zealand.

OBJECTIVE: Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is a complex and often poorly
understood condition, and people with CRPS will have diverse beliefs about their 
symptoms. According to the self-regulation model, these beliefs (termed "illness 
perceptions") influence health behaviors and outcomes. Previous studies have
found that psychological factors influence CRPS outcomes, but few studies have
investigated CRPS patients' illness perceptions specifically. The present study
examined whether illness perceptions were related to pain intensity and other
relevant outcomes in people with CRPS.
METHODS: In this cross-sectional study, 53 patients with CRPS (type 1 and type 2)
completed questionnaires assessing illness perceptions, pain, disability, and
psychological factors. Multiple regression analyses were used to determine
whether illness perceptions were associated with pain intensity, disability,
depression, and kinesiophobia, after controlling for possible covariates
(including clinical and demographic factors, pain catastrophizing, and negative
affect).
RESULTS: Negative illness perceptions were associated with greater pain,
disability, and kinesiophobia, but not depression. Specifically, attributing more
symptoms to CRPS (more negative illness identity perceptions) was associated with
greater pain intensity, and reporting a poorer understanding of CRPS (lower
illness coherence scores) was associated with greater disability and
kinesiophobia.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with CRPS with more negative illness perceptions
(particularly perceptions indicating a poor understanding of their condition)
also experience greater pain, disability, and kinesiophobia. Future research
could investigate whether altering CRPS patients' illness perceptions influences 
clinical outcomes.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
American Academy of Pain Medicine. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/pm/pnaa320 
PMID: 33029630  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Eur J Psychotraumatol. 2020 Jun 17;11(1):1764722. doi:
10.1080/20008198.2020.1764722.

Post-traumatic stress disorder in volunteer firefighters: influence of specific
risk and protective factors.

Schnell T(1), Suhr F(1), Weierstall-Pust R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Medical School Hamburg,
University of Applied Sciences and Medical University, Hamburg, Germany.

Background: Volunteer firefighters belong to a risk population regarding the
development of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). However, given the frequency
of work-related trauma, PTSD prevalences seem relatively low. Protective factors 
appear to be effective and are the focus of this study.
Objective: We investigated the PTSD-prevalence as well as the influence of trauma
exposure and the impact of protective factors resilience and Sense of Coherence
(SoC) on symptoms of PTSD in volunteer firefighters.
Method: Data from 232 participants of an online questionnaire study were analysed
using a path model approach.
Results: 'The results suggest a possible prevalence of PTSD of 12.5% and 2.2% for
partial PTSD based on self-report measures. SoC and trauma event load proved to
be independent of each other, as no intercorrelations were found. But both
directly predicted PTSD severity. Higher resilience scores predicted the
participants' Sense of Coherence, but PTSD severity was only indirectly affected 
by resilience, which was entirely mediated by SoC. Further, although SoC and
trauma load increase with age and years of job experience, it is only SoC that
affects PTSD severity, not age or years of experience.
Conclusions: The results emphasize that not only exposure to potentially
traumatic events predicts the later probability of developing symptoms of PTSD,
but that the integration of stressful experiences into the self-concept
(associated with SoC) is essential for the development of PTSD. Future research
should address the question of causality between SoC and PTSD, and consider which
factors moderate the SoC.

Publisher: Antecedentes: Los bomberos voluntarios pertenecen a una población de
riesgo con respecto al desarrollo del Trastorno de Estrés Postraumático (TEPT).
Sin embargo, dada la frecuencia de los traumas relacionados con el trabajo, las
prevalencias del TEPT parecen relativamente bajas. Los factores protectores
parecen ser efectivos y son el foco de este estudio.Objetivo: Investigamos la
prevalencia del TEPT, así como la influencia de la exposición al trauma y el
impacto de los factores de protección de la resiliencia y el sentido de
coherencia (SoC en su sigla en inglés) sobre los síntomas del TEPT en los
bomberos voluntarios.Método: Se analizaron los datos de 232 participantes de un
estudio por cuestionario en línea, utilizando un enfoque de modelo de
ruta.Resultados: Los resultados sugieren una posible prevalencia del TEPT de
12.5% y 2.2% para TEPT parcial, basado en medidas de autoinforme. La carga de
eventos de trauma y el SoC demostraron ser independientes uno del otro, ya que no
se encontraron intercorrelaciones. Pero ambos predijeron directamente la
severidad del TEPT. Los puntajes más altos de resiliencia predijeron el sentido
de coherencia de los participantes, pero la severidad del TEPT solo se vio
afectada indirectamente por la resiliencia, que fue mediada completamente por el 
SoC. Además, aunque el SoC y la carga traumática aumentan con la edad y los años 
de experiencia laboral, solo el SoC afecta la gravedad del TEPT, no la edad o los
años de experiencia.Conclusiones: Los resultados enfatizan que no solo la
exposición a eventos potencialmente traumáticos predice la probabilidad posterior
de desarrollar síntomas de TEPT, sino que la integración de las experiencias
estresantes en el autoconcepto (asociado con SoC) es esencial para el desarrollo 
de TEPT. La investigación futura debería abordar la cuestión de la causalidad
entre el SoC y el TEPT, y considerar qué factores moderan el SoC.Publisher: 背景:
志愿者消防员属于发生创伤后应激障碍 (PTSD) 的风险人群。然而考虑到工作相关创伤的频率,
PTSD的流行率似乎相对较低。保护因素似乎有效且为本研究的关注点。目的:
我们考查了志愿者消防人员的创伤后应激障碍流行率和创伤暴露的影响以及保护因素心理韧性和心理一致感 (SoC) 对创伤后应激障碍症状的影响。方法:
使用路径模型方法分析了来自在线问卷研究的232名参与者的数据。结果: 结果表明, 根据自评式测量,
可能的PTSD和不完全PTSD的流行率分别为12.5%和2.2%。 未发现SoC和创伤事件负荷的交互相关,
证明两者相互独立。但是两者都直接预测了PTSD严重程度。较高的心理韧性得分可以预测参与者的心理一致感, 但是PTSD的严重程度仅受心理韧性的间接影响,
这一作用被SoC完全中介。此外, 尽管SoC和创伤负荷随年龄和工作经验年份增长而增加, 但只有SoC会影响PTSD严重程度, 年龄和工作经验年份不会影响。结论: 
结果着重说明了不仅暴露于潜在创伤事件会预测之后出现PTSD症状的可能性, 而且将应激经历整合到自我概念 (与SoC相关)
中对于PTSD的发生至关重要。未来的研究应致力于解决SoC与PTSD之间的因果关系问题, 并考虑哪些因素是SoC的调节因素。.
© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor &
Francis Group.

DOI: 10.1080/20008198.2020.1764722 
PMCID: PMC7473037
PMID: 33029308 

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported by
the authors.


242. BMC Public Health. 2020 Oct 6;20(1):1512. doi: 10.1186/s12889-020-09608-2.

Acceptability of a cessation intervention for pregnant smokers: a qualitative
study guided by Normalization Process Theory.

Jones SE(1), Hamilton S(2), Bell R(3), Araújo-Soares V(4), White M(3)(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health and Life Sciences, Teesside University, Borough Road,
Middlesbrough, TS1 3BX, UK. Susan.Jones@tees.ac.uk.
(2)School of Health and Life Sciences, Teesside University, Borough Road,
Middlesbrough, TS1 3BX, UK.
(3)Institute of Health and Society, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne,
UK.
(4)Department of Health Technology and Services Research, University of Twente,
Enschede, Netherlands.
(5)MRC Epidemiology Unit, School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.

BACKGROUND: Smoking during pregnancy has serious consequences for maternal and
child health. An intervention package to embed National Institute for Health and 
Care Excellence guidance (babyClear©) was delivered across maternity and stop
smoking services (SSS) within an English region, to support pregnant women to
stop smoking. We aimed to ascertain acceptability among pregnant smokers
receiving the intervention.
METHODS: Pregnant smokers who received the intervention and participated in the
study were interviewed, first at around 16 weeks of pregnancy (n = 17) and again 
several weeks later (n = 8) or postpartum (n = 3). Interview schedules were
informed by Normalization Process Theory (NPT) and Theoretical Domains Framework;
interviews were audio-recorded, transcribed and analysed thematically, using the 
Framework method and NPT. Findings are grouped according to the four NPT
concepts.
RESULTS: Coherence: Carbon monoxide monitoring appeared to make sense; women were
motivated to quit by being monitored. Cognitive participation: When linked to a
professional discourse of caring and concern, some women were prompted to engage 
with the SS message. Women were more guarded in their reaction to initial contact
from the SSS; reporting attending appointments successfully, or in some cases,
experiencing problems that decreased engagement and made quitting harder.
Collective action: Where women continued to smoke or failed to attend SSS
appointments, an extra intervention was delivered, the Risk Perception Tool
(RPT), which often prompted pregnant women to act. Reflexive monitoring: Most
women accepted the need for a hard-hitting approach (RPT) and, while it
distressed them at the time, they claimed they were subsequently grateful for it.
SSS intervention post-RPT was seen as supportive, partly because it often
involved home visits. Aspects of family inclusion in babyClear© were reported as 
beneficial. In Trusts where women experienced services as less focused on
prioritising the stop smoking message, less well integrated or reported maternity
staff as less adept at delivering the RPT, women found babyClear© less acceptable
overall.
CONCLUSIONS: The babyClear© package was acceptable to pregnant smokers
interviewed during and shortly after pregnancy and, in some cases, to promote
quitting. However, some contexts were more optimal than others, leading to
variation in acceptability overall.

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-020-09608-2 
PMCID: PMC7542132
PMID: 33023537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Oct 2;17(19). pii: E7214. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17197214.

Drought, Wellbeing and Adaptive Capacity: Why Do Some People Stay Well?

Austin EK(1), Handley T(2), Kiem AS(1), Rich JL(3), Perkins D(2), Kelly B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Water, Climate and Land (CWCL), Faculty of Science, University of
Newcastle, Callaghan 2308, Australia.
(2)Centre for Rural and Remote Mental Health (CRRMH), Faculty of Health and
Medicine, University of Newcastle, Orange 2800, Australia.
(3)Centre for Brain and Mental Health Research (CBMHR), Faculty of Health and
Medicine, University of Newcastle, Callaghan 2308, Australia.
(4)School of Medicine and Public Health, Faculty of Health and Medicine,
University of Newcastle, Callaghan 2308, Australia.

Drought is a threat to public health. Individual and community adaptive capacity 
is crucial when responding to the impacts of drought. Gaps remain in the
understandings of the relationship between wellbeing and adaptive capacity, and
whether increased wellbeing can lead to improved adaptive capacity (or vice
versa). This paper explores the relationship between drought, wellbeing and
adaptive capacity to provide insights that will inform actions to enhance
adaptive capacity, and hence increase opportunities for effective drought
adaptation. The theory of salutogenesis and the associated sense of coherence
(SOC) are used to measure adaptive capacity and to explain why some individuals
remain well and adapt to adversity while others do not. An online survey of rural
residents (n = 163) in drought-affected New South Wales (NSW), Australia, was
conducted from November 2018 to January 2019. Linear regression was used to model
the relationships between SOC, sociodemographic factors, drought and wellbeing.
Findings demonstrate that SOC is strongly correlated with wellbeing. Drought
condition did not influence adaptive capacity, although adaptive capacity and
drought-related stress were only weakly correlated. Increased wellbeing was found
to be associated with stronger adaptive capacity and therefore, an individuals'
capacity to cope with adversity, such as drought.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17197214 
PMCID: PMC7579559
PMID: 33023114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2020 Jul;2020:3035-3039. doi:
10.1109/EMBC44109.2020.9176022.

Using Biosignals for Objective Measurement of Presence in Virtual Reality
Environments.

Athif M, Rathnayake BLK, Nagahapitiya SMDBS, Samarasinghe SADAK, Samaratunga PS, 
Peiris RL, De Silva AC.

The concept of 'presence' in the context of virtual reality (VR) refers to the
experience of being in the virtual environment, even when one is physically
situated in the real world. Therefore, it is a key parameter of assessing a VR
system, based on which, improvements can be made to it. To overcome the
limitations of existing methods that are based on standard questionnaires and
behavioral analysis, this study proposes to investigate the suitability of
biosignals of the user to derive an objective measure of presence. The proposed
approach includes experiments conducted on 20 users, recording EEG, ECG and
electrodermal activity (EDA) signals while experiencing custom designed VR
scenarios with factors contributing to presence suppressed and unsuppressed.
Mutual Information based feature selection and subsequent paired t-tests used to 
identify significant variations in biosignal features when each factor of
presence is suppressed revealed significant (p < 0.05) differences in the mean
values of EEG signal power and coherence within alpha, beta and gamma bands
distributed in specific regions of the brain. Statistical features showed a
significant variation with the suppression of realism factor. The variations of
activity in the temporal region lead to the assumption of insula activation which
may be related to the sense of presence. Therefore, the use of biosignals for an 
objective measurement of presence in VR systems indicates promise.

DOI: 10.1109/EMBC44109.2020.9176022 
PMID: 33018645  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2020 Jul;2020:1927-1930. doi:
10.1109/EMBC44109.2020.9176680.

Study for quantitative evaluation of photoaging with photoacoustic microscopy.

Hattori H, Namita T, Kondo K, Yamakawa M, Shiina T.

Skin aging caused by ultraviolet light exposure is one of the serious problems
from the viewpoint of beauty and healthcare. This is because ultraviolet light
can cause age spot, wrinkles, at the worst case, skin cancer and so on. To
evaluate skin aging, various modalities are being used, such as histopathological
diagnosis, optical coherence tomography, ultrasound examination (B-mode imaging).
However, they have disadvantages in terms of invasiveness, penetration depth and 
tissue specificity, respectively. To overcome these defects, photoacoustic
imaging (PAI), a novel modality was used in this work. This modality can sense
differences of tissue characteristics non-invasively. In this experiment, human
skin tissues in various generations (i.e. various degrees of photoaging) were
measured by using acoustic resolution photoacoustic microscopy (AR-PAM). To
verify the feasibility of quantitative skin aging evaluation with PA technique,
signals from sectioned human skin (cheek and buttock; female from 28 to 95 years 
old) were measured with PA microscopy. The effects of photoaging progress on the 
signal intensity were investigated. The results demonstrated that the PA signal
from the dermis significantly increases with aging progress (p < 0.05). These
analyses demonstrate the feasibility of quantitative skin aging evaluation with a
PAI system.

DOI: 10.1109/EMBC44109.2020.9176680 
PMID: 33018379  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Eur J Cancer Care (Engl). 2021 Jan;30(1):e13335. doi: 10.1111/ecc.13335. Epub
2020 Oct 4.

A salutogenic model predicting the need for psycho-oncological care and its
utilisation-The role of generalised resistance resources and sense of coherence.

Cecon N(1), Pfaff H(1), Lee S(1), Dresen A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sociology, Health Services Research and Rehabilitation
Science, Faculty of Human Sciences and Faculty of Medicine, University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Although many cancer patients experience psychological distress, not
all affected patients utilise psycho-oncological care. We aim to examine the role
of generalised resistance resources (GRRs) and sense of coherence (SOC) in
predicting cancer patient needs for psycho-oncological care and its utilisation. 
A salutogenic prediction model was conceptualised and statistically tested.
METHODS: Survey data (response rate 88.94%) from 2270 breast cancer patients one 
year after treatment in one of 88 certified hospitals in North Rhine-Westphalia, 
Germany, were analysed. Structural Equation Modelling analysis was performed.
RESULTS: 21.6% of patients (n = 485; N = 2249) felt they currently needed
psycho-oncological care, of which 61.6% currently utilised it (n = 299, N = 485).
42.2% (n = 953, N = 2259) had the need for psycho-oncological care in the
previous 12 months, of which 58.0% (n = 553, N = 953) utilised it. Several GRRs
directly predict the need for psycho-oncological care and SOC, as well as
indirectly predict the utilisation of psycho-oncological care. Past utilisation
significantly affects current need and utilisation. The model shows good model
fit.
CONCLUSIONS: Generalised resistance resources and SOC affect the utilisation of
psycho-oncological care. Therefore, measuring key GRRs and SOC during cancer
treatment should be integrated into patient care as a salutogenic approach, to
identify resources and vulnerabilities on an individual level.

© 2021 The Authors. European Journal of Cancer Care published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ecc.13335 
PMID: 33015897 


247. Front Psychol. 2020 Aug 18;11:2115. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.02115. eCollection
2020.

Development of a Generic Workshop Appraisal Scale (WASC) for Organizational
Health Interventions and Evaluation.

Fridrich A(1), Bauer GF(2), Jenny GJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Stiftung Patientensicherheit Schweiz, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Center of Salutogenesis, Division of Public and Organizational Health,
Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Prevention Institute, University of Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland.

This study presents the development of a generic workshop appraisal scale (WASC) 
for the evaluation of organizational health interventions. Based on the session
evaluation questionnaire (SEQ) by Stiles (1980), we developed a short, generic
10-item scale with pairs of adjectives, covering five facets: comprehensibility, 
relevance, novelty, activation, and valence. Our study is based on N = 499
employees from four organizations who participated in 41 workshops and filled out
an evaluation questionnaire on-site. The questionnaire contained the newly
developed WASC, as well as items capturing satisfaction with the developed output
and outcome expectancies. Results from confirmative factor analysis confirmed the
hypothesized five-factor structure of the WASC. The factor structure was found to
be nearly invariant across the four organizations, a result that needs to be
replicated in larger samples. Analysis of intra-class correlations indicated that
25% of the variance in workshop appraisal can be explained at workshop level.
Hereby, perceived relevance and novelty exhibited lower amounts of shared
variance, indicating that corresponding workshop appraisals are influenced more
by individual factors and less by group dynamics. Furthermore, results from
mediation analysis revealed that participants' workshop appraisals were
significantly related to their outcome expectancies, and that this relationship
was mediated by output satisfaction. Again, the facets showed differential
effects: Relevance and comprehensibility seem to contribute most to the total
effect on outcome expectancy, followed by activation, whereas valence and
especially novelty play a minor role. Taken together, participants' workshop
appraisals - together with output satisfaction and outcome expectancy - may be
helpful for monitoring the implementation process and allow for corrective action
if necessary.

Copyright © 2020 Fridrich, Bauer and Jenny.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.02115 
PMCID: PMC7461960
PMID: 33013537 


248. Front Psychol. 2020 Sep 3;11:2055. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.02055. eCollection
2020.

A Structural Equation Model of Perceived Autonomy Support and Growth Mindset in
Undergraduate Students: The Mediating Role of Sense of Coherence.

Ma C(1), Ma Y(1), Lan X(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Educational Science and Technology, Northwest Minzu University,
Lanzhou, China.
(2)Department of Developmental Psychology and Socialization, University of
Padova, Padova, Italy.

Although prior research has extensively documented the correlates of growth
mindset, little is known about its antecedents in undergraduate students. Guided 
by the self-determination theory, the current study investigated the association 
of perceived autonomy support (i.e., parental autonomy support and teacher
autonomy support) with growth mindset and assessed whether sense of coherence
mediated this association. A total of 1,030 Chinese undergraduate students (62.4%
females; M age = 20.44, SD = 1.52) aged from 18 to 25 years were involved in this
study; they were asked to fill out a set of self-reported questionnaires. Results
of the structural equation modeling showed that sense of coherence fully mediated
the association between parental autonomy support and growth mindset and between 
teacher autonomy support and growth mindset. More precisely, parental autonomy
support and teacher autonomy support were each positively associated with sense
of coherence, which in turn was positively related to growth mindset. The current
findings further confirm the beneficial effect of autonomy support on
individuals' adaptive skills in a collective cultural context, suggesting that
autonomy-supportive parents and teachers can contribute to undergraduate
students' growth mindset through the role of sense of coherence.

Copyright © 2020 Ma, Ma and Lan.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.02055 
PMCID: PMC7494807
PMID: 33013521 


249. Cien Saude Colet. 2020 Oct;25(10):3955-3967. doi:
10.1590/1413-812320202510.34312018. Epub 2019 Jan 10.

Relationship between sense of coherence and diabetes mellitus: a systematic
review.

[Article in English, Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Márquez-Palacios JH(1), Yanez-Peñúñuri LY(2), Salazar-Estrada JG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de post-grado en Psicología con Orientación en Calidad de Vida y
Salud, Universidad de Guadalajara. Carretera Guadalajara, Ameca, km 45.5. 46600
Ameca Jalisco México. jsalazar@valles.udg.mx.
(2)Departamento de Ciencias Sociales, Universidad de Sonora. H. Caborca Sonora
México.
(3)Centro Universitario de los Valles, Universidad de Guadalajara. Ameca Jalisco 
México.

The aim was to synthesize the best scientific evidence on the effect of sense of 
coherence in disease development, treatment, and biomedical metabolic control
indicators, as well as the complications involved for people at risk of
developing diabetes and for diabetics. The systematic review method was
implemented. Search and selection efforts of two independent reviewers on Scopus,
Web of Science, PubMed, Ebsco, Science Direct, and manuals databases, available
until 2017, in Spanish and English, of the population aged 18 and over. From a
total of 154 studies, 20 articles were included in the systematic review. Over
half of the studies used the SOC-13 version to verify the sense of coherence and 
the most frequent indicator of metabolic control was glycated hemoglobin. In
addition to this, 14 of the 20 studies found a statistically significant
relationship between sense of coherence and diabetes. It is concluded that the
sense of coherence has a strong correlation with diabetes in the different phases
of the disease and is related to the reduction of risk for the development of the
disease, a reduction of glycated hemoglobin values, and the appearance of
diabetes mellitus-related complications.

Publisher: El objetivo fue sintetizar las mejores evidencias científicas sobre el
efecto del sentido de coherencia en el desarrollo de la enfermedad, tratamiento e
indicadores biomédicos de control metabólico y desarrollo de complicaciones de
personas en riesgo de desarrollar diabetes y en diabéticos. El método utilizado
fue la revisión sistemática. Búsqueda y selección por dos revisores
independientes en las bases de datos Scopus, Web of Science, PubMed, Ebsco,
Science Direct y manuales, disponibles hasta 2017, en español e inglés, en
población con edad superior a 18 años. De un total de 154 estudios, 20 artículos 
fueron incluidos en la revisión sistemática. Más de la mitad de los estudios
utilizaron la versión SOC-13 para la verificación del sentido de coherencia y el 
indicador de control metabólico más frecuente fue la hemoglobina glucosilada.
Además, 14, de los 20 estudios, encontraron una relación estadísticamente
significativa entre el sentido de coherencia y la diabetes. Se concluye que el
sentido de coherencia tiene una fuerte correlación con la diabetes en las
diferentes fases de la enfermedad y está relacionado con la reducción del riesgo 
para el desarrollo de la enfermedad, la reducción de los valores de hemoglobina
glucosilada y la aparición de complicaciones de la diabetes mellitus.
DOI: 10.1590/1413-812320202510.34312018 
PMID: 32997027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Internet Interv. 2020 Aug 27;22:100343. doi: 10.1016/j.invent.2020.100343.
eCollection 2020 Dec.

Examining mediators of change in wellbeing, stress, and depression in a blended, 
Internet-based, ACT intervention for university students.

Räsänen P(1), Muotka J(1), Lappalainen R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Jyväskylä, Finland.

A coach-guided Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) intervention that uses a
blended approach of two face-to-face and five online sessions (iACT; N = 33) has 
been found to be more effective than a waiting-list control condition (WLC;
N = 35) at enhancing the wellbeing of university students while also reducing
stress and depression. The present study explored possible mediators of change
that may account for the outcomes of the study. Mediation analyses revealed that 
changes in the non-reactivity subscale of mindfulness mediated changes in
wellbeing, depression, and stress in the iACT group. In addition, changes in the 
sense of coherence subscale of meaningfulness mediated changes in all outcomes.
Psychological flexibility and cognitive defusion did not mediate changes in
outcomes. The results suggest that the use of practices focusing on
non-reactivity, meaning the ability to allow thoughts and feelings to come and go
without getting carried away by them, is especially important for enhancing the
wellbeing of university students. A focus on enhancing meaningfulness also plays 
a significant role in reducing psychological distress. These findings provide a
first step toward understanding the potential mechanisms of change taking place
in brief, Internet-supported, blended ACT programs.

© 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.invent.2020.100343 
PMCID: PMC7508697
PMID: 32995301 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.


251. Issues Ment Health Nurs. 2021 Jun;42(6):581-590. doi:
10.1080/01612840.2020.1820119. Epub 2020 Sep 29.

The Relationships between Health Professionals' Perceived Quality of Care, Family
Involvement and Sense of Coherence in Community Mental Health Services.

Moen ØL(1), Skundberg-Kletthagen H(1), Lundquist LO(2), Gonzalez MT(1)(3),
Schröder A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Health, Institute of Health Sciences, Norwegian
University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Gjovik, Norway.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health, University Health Care Research Center, Örebro
University, Örebro, Sweden.
(3)Faculty of Health and Social Sciences, Institute of Nursing and Health
Sciences, University of South-Eastern Norway (USN), Drammen, Norway.

Mental health professionals have a responsibility to ensure the best possible
quality of care. Family is strongly involved in the patient's everyday life. The 
aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between health care
professionals' perception of the quality of care, attitudes of family involvement
and their own sense of coherence. A descriptive quantitative study with fifty-six
health professionals, completed "Quality in Psychiatric Care-Community Outpatient
Psychiatric Staff", "Families' Importance in Nursing Care-health professionals'
attitudes", "The Sense of Coherence Scale-13". The health professionals perceived
quality as high and did not perceive the families as a burden.

DOI: 10.1080/01612840.2020.1820119 
PMID: 32990103 


252. J Rehabil Med. 2021 Jan 11;53(1):jrm00143. doi: 10.2340/16501977-2748.

Tolerability and psychological effects of a multimodal day-care rehabilitation
program for persons with Huntington's disease.

Ringqvist K(1), Borg K, Möller MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Danderyd University Hospital,
Stockholm, Sweden. E-mail: karin.ringqvist@sll.se.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the psychological benefits of intense, inpatient,
multimodal rehabilitation for persons with Huntingtons disease (HD), as found in 
earlier studies, also apply in a shorter, day-care setting.
DESIGN: Prospective, non-randomized cohort study.
SUBJECTS: Twenty patients attending a group-based 8-week (3 days/week)
rehabilitation programme aimed at persons in early stages of HD.
METHODS: An explorative cohort study on register data from a specialized
rehabilitation centre, includ-ing descriptive data, number of cancellations, a
self-reported evaluation, and measures of psychiatric symptoms, health-related
quality of life, sense of coherence and physical function at baseline and at the 
end of rehabilitation.
RESULTS: Patients' attendance rate was almost 90%. Patients were satisfied, and
displayed significantly reduced anxiety and depression and improved
health-related quality of life after rehabilitation. Baseline measures of sense
of coherence showed significant negative correlation with the number of cancelled
days of rehabilitation. Physical function improved, but did not correlate
significantly with psychological outcome measures.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that an 8-week multimodal day-care
rehabilitation programme can be tolerable, reduce psychiatric symptoms, and
improve health-related quality of life for people with HD. A higher sense of
coherence seems to promote attendance rates. Further larger studies, including
the impact of cognition and disease progression on the treatment effect, are
warranted.

DOI: 10.2340/16501977-2748 
PMID: 32989469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Intellect Disabil. 2020 Sep 28:1744629520961942. doi: 10.1177/1744629520961942.
[Epub ahead of print]

External sources promoting resilience in adults with intellectual disabilities: A
systematic literature review.

Scheffers F(1), Moonen X(2), van Vugt E(2).

Author information: 
(1)MEE ZHN, The Netherlands; 1234University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)1234University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Persons with an intellectual disability are at increased risk of
experiencing adversities. The current study aims at providing an overview of the 
research on how resilience in adults with intellectual disabilities, in the face 
of adversity, is supported by sources in their social network.
METHOD: A literature review was conducted in the databases Psycinfo and Web of
Science. To evaluate the quality of the included studies, the Mixed Method
Appraisal Tool (MMAT) was used.
RESULTS: The themes: "positive emotions," "network acceptance," "sense of
coherence" and "network support," were identified as sources of resilience in the
social network of the adults with intellectual disabilities.
CONCLUSION: The current review showed that research addressing sources of
resilience among persons with intellectual disabilities is scarce. In this first 
overview, four sources of resilience in the social network of people with
intellectual disabilities were identified that interact and possibly strengthen
each other.

DOI: 10.1177/1744629520961942 
PMID: 32985320 


254. J Family Med Prim Care. 2020 Jun 30;9(6):2963-2968. doi:
10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_155_20. eCollection 2020 Jun.

Association between health-related quality of life and sense of coherence among
health professionals working in primary health centers consuming tobacco in
Jaipur, India.

Sharma A(1), Chhabra KG(2), Agarwal S(1), Bhansali S(3), Singh P(4), Nagrale
RG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Home Science, University of Rajasthan, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India.
(2)Department of Public Health Dentistry, Sharad Pawar Dental College and
Hospital, DMIMS (Deemed to be University), Sawangi, (Meghe) Wardha, Maharashtra, 
India.
(3)Department of Preventive and Social Medicine, S.N Medical College, Jodhpur,
Rajasthan, India.
(4)Department of Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry, K.S.D Jain Dental College 
and Hospital, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.
(5)Department of Public Health Dentistry, M A Rangoonwala College of Dental
Sciences and Research Centre, Azam Campus 2390-B, K.B, Hidayatulla Rd, Camp,
Pune, Maharashtra, India.

Background: Health-related quality of life (HRQOL) and senses of coherence (SoC) 
can be affected by the use of tobacco. Hence, the aim of the present study was to
explore the association between HRQOL and SoC among health professionals working 
in primary health centers (PHCs) consuming Tobacco.
Materials and Methods: It was a cross-sectional descriptive study where sampling 
technique used was systematic stratified random sampling. Jaipur District has 37 
PHCs retrieved from site of NRHM Rajasthan. A close-ended questionnaire was
prepared to conduct the interview.
Results: Majority of study participants (57; 37.01%) were of 36-40 years of age. 
Males respondents (86; 55.85%) consuming tobacco were more in number than female 
respondents. Majority of study subjects (91; 59.09%) consumed smoked kind of
tobacco, in which most contributed were nurses (49; 62.82%). On applying a linear
regression model, it was determined that all subscale of SF-36 was significantly 
(P ≤ 0.000) associated with SoC.
Conclusion: From above, it was concluded that there was a strong association
between HRQOL and SoC among health professionals working in primary health
centers consuming tobacco.

Copyright: © 2020 Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care.

DOI: 10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_155_20 
PMCID: PMC7491764
PMID: 32984156 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


255. Soc Sci Med. 2021 Jan;268:113376. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2020.113376. Epub 2020
Sep 17.

A salutogenic perspective on sport-for-development research.

Super S(1), Verkooijen K(2), Koelen M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Wageningen University, Chair Group Health and Society, P.O. Box 8130, 6700, EW
Wageningen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: sabina.super@wur.nl.
(2)Wageningen University, Chair Group Health and Society, P.O. Box 8130, 6700, EW
Wageningen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: kirsten.verkooijen@wur.nl.
(3)Wageningen University, Chair Group Health and Society, P.O. Box 8130, 6700, EW
Wageningen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: maria.koelen@wur.nl.

RATIONALE: Research on positive youth development through sport is confronted
with a number of limitations: it lacks a clear theoretical basis of mechanisms
underlying life skill development through sport, it has a narrow focus on the
sports setting thereby neglecting the interplay between life domains in reaching 
positive youth development, and the mechanisms underlying the transfer process of
newly acquired skills and competences from the sports setting to other life
domains are unclear.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to advance research in in this field by applying
theoretical insights from the salutogenic model of health to address the
aforementioned limitations.
INNOVATION: The salutogenic model of health describes how health and well-being
develops in challenging or stressful situations and offers an interesting
perspective on the mechanisms underlying youth developmental processes while
simultaneously aligning well with the tenets of the positive youth development
approach. The application of the salutogenic model of health offered a number of 
interesting theoretical insights to further understand 1) the mechanisms
underlying positive youth development through sport (i.e., enhancing
comprehensibility, manageability and meaningfulness), 2) that youth development
arises in the interaction between an individual's stressors, resources and sense 
of coherence across different life domains, and 3) the central role of both
generalized and resistance resources and sense of coherence in the transfer of
life skills between life domains. Given that sense of coherence plays a vital
role in the healthy development of individuals and the transfer of life skills
across life domains, it would make sense to strengthen the sense of coherence of 
youths in sports programs.
CONCLUSION: Based on this theoretical analysis, several recommendations and
considerations for further research on positive youth development through sport
are provided.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2020.113376 
PMID: 32979777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Psychiatr Danub. 2020 Sep;32(Suppl 2):226-232.

Resilience in Health and Illness.

Babić R(1), Babić M, Rastović P, Ćurlin M, Šimić J, Mandić K, Pavlović K.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Studies, University of Mostar, 88000 Mostar, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, romana.babic@gmail.com.

Resilience is a relatively new concept that lacks clarity although it is
increasingly used in everyday conversation and across various disciplines. The
term was first introduced into psychology and psychiatry from technical sciences 
and afterwards thorough medicine and healthcare. It represents a complex set of
various protective and salutogenic factors and process important for
understanding health and illness, and treatment and healing processes. It is
defined as a protective factor that makes an individual more resilient to adverse
events that lead to positive developmental outcomes. Resilience is a positive
adaptation after stressful situations and it represents mechanisms of coping and 
rising above difficult experiences, i.e., the capacity of a person to
successfully adapt to change, resist the negative impact of stressors and avoid
occurrence of significant dysfunctions. It represents the ability to return to
the previous, so-called "normal" or healthy condition after trauma, accident,
tragedy, or illness. In other words, resilience refers to the ability to cope
with difficult, stressful and traumatic situations while maintaining or restoring
normal functioning. The higher the resilience, the lower the vulnerability and
risk of illness. Resilient individuals tend to be optimistic, have a tendency to 
see everything as a useful experience, focus on personal strengths and qualities,
use constructive criticism, develop close relationships with others, have
developed social skills, and are emotionally conscious. Good resilience
aggravates and prevents the onset of disease, provides good heath, facilitates
and accelerates healing, and provides productive life and a sense of well-being
despite chronic illness. Resilience experts believe that anyone can strengthen
their resilience and thus contribute to the advancement of health and, if ill,
ease the illness, accelerate and facilitate healing.


PMID: 32970640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Health Promot Int. 2020 Sep 24. pii: daaa084. doi: 10.1093/heapro/daaa084. [Epub 
ahead of print]

'A synergy model of health': an integration of salutogenesis and the health
assets model.

Pérez-Wilson P(1)(2), Marcos-Marcos J(3), Morgan A(4), Eriksson M(5), Lindström
B(6), Álvarez-Dardet C(2)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Health and Family Medicine Program, School of Medicine, University of
Concepcion, Concepcion, Chile.
(2)Public Health Research Group, University of Alicante, Alicante, Spain.
(3)Department of Health Psychology, University of Alicante, Alicante, Spain.
(4)Yunus Centre for Social Business and Health, Glasgow Caledonian University in 
London, UK.
(5)Department of Health Sciences, University West, Trollhättan, Sweden.
(6)Nordic School of Public Health, NHV, Västra Frölunda, Sweden.
(7)Public Health and Epidemiology Biomedical Research Network (CIBERESP), Madrid,
Spain.

This article proposes to advance the connections between salutogenic theory and
assets models for health improvement. There is a need to integrate their use in
public health and health promotion so that their respective potentials can be
fully developed. This requires their synergies to be made more explicit so that a
more coherent approach can be taken to their utilization. A mechanism is
therefore needed that helps to raise awareness of them and their value as a
resource together. Bronfenbrenner's bioecological theory provides one framework
that can support better integration of salutogenesis with the applied nature of
assets-based models. This paper proposes a new 'synergy model for health' that
integrates key concepts associated with salutogenic theory-generalized and
specific resistance resources (GRRs/SRRs) and generalized and specific resistance
deficits and the sense of coherence (SOC). In doing so, it highlights those GRRs 
and SRRs which are assets that, either individually or collectively, help to
develop a stronger SOC. Higher levels of SOC can then support the transformations
of potential resources into available assets (that people can understand, manage 
and make sense of), capable of producing positive health development. The
proposed 'Synergy model of health' aims to contribute to a deeper theoretical
understanding of health and development through the integration of the key
elements of both salutogenesis and assets models. This can facilitate a better
contextualization of the ideas into public health policy and practice by making
the salutogenic theory more action-oriented and the assets model more
theoretical.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/daaa084 
PMID: 32968813 


258. Heart Rhythm. 2021 May;18(5):793-800. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2020.09.012. Epub 2020
Sep 19.

Atrial arrhythmias and patient-reported outcomes in adults with congenital heart 
disease: An international study.

Casteigt B(1), Samuel M(1), Laplante L(1), Shohoudi A(1), Apers S(2), Kovacs
AH(3), Luyckx K(4), Thomet C(5), Budts W(6), Enomoto J(7), Sluman MA(8), Lu
CW(9), Jackson JL(10), Cook SC(11), Chidambarathanu S(12), Alday L(13), Eriksen
K(14), Dellborg M(15), Berghammer M(16), Johansson B(17), Mackie AS(18), Menahem 
S(19), Caruana M(20), Veldtman G(21), Soufi A(22), Fernandes SM(23), White K(24),
Callus E(25), Kutty S(26), Brouillette J(1), Moons P(27), Khairy P(28); of the
APPROACH-IS Consortium and the International Society for Adult Congenital Heart
Disease (ISACHD).

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Heart Institute, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada.
(2)KU Leuven Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Knight Cardiovascular Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland,
Oregon.
(4)KU Leuven-University of Leuven, Psychology and Development in Context, Leuven,
Belgium and UNIBS, University of the Free State, Bloemfontein, South Africa.
(5)Center for Congenital Heart Disease, Inselspital-Bern University Hospital,
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(6)Division of Congenital and Structural Cardiology, University Hospitals Leuven 
and Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(7)Department of Adult Congenital Heart Disease, Chiba Cardiovascular Center,
Chiba, Japan.
(8)Department of Cardiology, Jeroen Bosch Hospital, 's Hertogenbosch, the
Netherlands and Coronel Institute for Occupational Health, Academic Medical
Centre, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(10)Center for Biobehavioral Health, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus,
Ohio.
(11)Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center, Helen DeVos Children's Hospital, Grand
Rapids, Michigan.
(12)Frontier Lifeline Hospital (Dr. K.M. Cherian Heart Foundation), Chennai,
India.
(13)Division of Cardiology, Hospital de Niños, Córdoba, Argentina.
(14)Department of Cardiology, Oslo University Hospital-Rikshospitalet, Oslo,
Norway.
(15)Adult Congenital Heart Unit, Sahlgrenska University Hospital/Östra,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(16)Centre for Person-Centred Care (GPCC), University of Gothenburg and
Department of Health Sciences, University West, Trollhättan, Sweden.
(17)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå University, Umeå,
Sweden.
(18)Division of Cardiology, Stollery Children's Hospital, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Canada.
(19)Monash Medical Centre, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
(20)Department of Cardiology, Mater Dei Hospital, Birkirkara Bypass, Malta.
(21)Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center, Cincinnati Children's Hospital,
Cincinnati, Ohio.
(22)Department of Congenital Heart Disease, Louis Pradel Hospital, Lyon, France.
(23)Department of Pediatrics and Medicine, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Palo Alto, California.
(24)Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center, Washington University and Barnes
Jewish Heart & Vascular Center, and University of Missouri, Saint Louis,
Missouri.
(25)Clinical Psychology Service, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, Milan, Italy and
Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, Università degli Studi di Milano,
Milan, Italy.
(26)Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center, University of Nebraska Medical
Center/Children's Hospital & Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska.
(27)KU Leuven-University of Leuven, Department of Public Health and Primary Care,
Leuven, Belgium Institute of Health and Care Sciences, University of Gothenburg, 
Gothenburg, Sweden, and Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of
Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(28)Montreal Heart Institute, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada.
Electronic address: paul.khairy@umontreal.ca.

BACKGROUND: Atrial arrhythmias (ie, intra-atrial reentrant tachycardia and atrial
fibrillation) are a leading cause of morbidity and hospitalization in adults with
congenital heart disease (CHD). Little is known about their effect on quality of 
life and other patient-reported outcomes (PROs) in adults with CHD.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to assess the impact of atrial
arrhythmias on PROs in adults with CHD and explore geographic variations.
METHODS: Associations between atrial arrhythmias and PROs were assessed in a
cross-sectional study of adults with CHD from 15 countries spanning 5 continents.
A propensity-based matching weight analysis was performed to compare quality of
life, perceived health status, psychological distress, sense of coherence, and
illness perception in patients with and those without atrial arrhythmias.
RESULTS: A total of 4028 adults with CHD were enrolled, 707 (17.6%) of whom had
atrial arrhythmias. After applying matching weights, patients with and those
without atrial arrhythmias were comparable with regard to age (mean 40.1 vs 40.2 
years), demographic variables (52.5% vs 52.2% women), and complexity of CHD
(15.9% simple, 44.8% moderate, and 39.2% complex in both groups). Patients with
atrial arrhythmias had significantly worse PRO scores with respect to quality of 
life, perceived health status, psychological distress (ie, depression), and
illness perception. A summary score that combines all PRO measures was
significantly lower in patients with atrial arrhythmias (-3.3%; P = .0006).
Differences in PROs were consistent across geographic regions.
CONCLUSION: Atrial arrhythmias in adults with CHD are associated with an adverse 
impact on a broad range of PROs consistently across various geographic regions.

Copyright © 2020 Heart Rhythm Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2020.09.012 
PMID: 32961334 


259. BMC Palliat Care. 2020 Sep 21;19(1):146. doi: 10.1186/s12904-020-00647-5.

Co-construction of the family-focused support conversation: a participatory
learning and action research study to implement support for family members whose 
relatives are being discharged for end-of-life care at home or in a nursing home.

Duke S(1), Campling N(2), May CR(3), Lund S(2), Lunt N(4); Hospital to Home
Co-researcher group, Richardson A(5).

Collaborators: Bartlett G, Harris L, Flannery E, Connolly M, Booth P, Galpin G,
Wells E, Price E, Faulkner-Butcher A, Petch L, Ward C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, University of Southampton, Highfield, Southampton, 
SO17 1BJ, England. sd11@soton.ac.uk.
(2)School of Health Sciences, University of Southampton, Highfield, Southampton, 
SO17 1BJ, England.
(3)Faculty of Public Health and Policy, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, 15-17 Tavistock Place, London, WC1H 9SH, England.
(4)Department of Social Policy and Social Work, University of York, Heslington,
York, YO10 5DD, England.
(5)University Hospitals Southampton and School of Health Sciences, University of 
Southampton, Highfield, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, England.

BACKGROUND: Many people move in and out of hospital in the last few weeks of
life. These care transitions can be distressing for family members because they
signify the deterioration and impending death of their ill relative and
forthcoming family bereavement. Whilst there is evidence about psychosocial
support for family members providing end-of-life care at home, there is limited
evidence about how this can be provided in acute hospitals during care
transitions. Consequently, family members report a lack of support from
hospital-based healthcare professionals.
METHODS: The aim of the study was to implement research evidence for family
support at the end-of-life in acute hospital care. Informed by Participatory
Learning and Action Research and Normalization Process Theory (NPT) we
co-designed a context-specific intervention, the Family-Focused Support
Conversation, from a detailed review of research evidence. We undertook a pilot
implementation in three acute hospital Trusts in England to assess the potential 
for the intervention to be used in clinical practice. Pilot implementation was
undertaken during a three-month period by seven clinical co-researchers - nurses 
and occupational therapists in hospital specialist palliative care services.
Implementation was evaluated through data comprised of reflective records of
intervention delivery (n = 22), in-depth records of telephone implementation
support meetings between research team members and co-researchers (n = 3), and
in-depth evaluation meetings (n = 2). Data were qualitatively analysed using an
NPT framework designed for intervention evaluation.
RESULTS: Clinical co-researchers readily incorporated the Family-Focused Support 
Conversation into their everyday work. The intervention changed family support
from being solely patient-focused, providing information about patient needs, to 
family-focused, identifying family concerns about the significance and
implications of discharge and facilitating family-focused care. Co-researchers
reported an increase in family members' involvement in discharge decisions and
end-of-life care planning.
CONCLUSION: The Family-Focused Support Conversation is a novel, evidenced-based
and context specific intervention. Pilot implementation demonstrated the
potential for the intervention to be used in acute hospitals to support family
members during end-of-life care transitions. This subsequently informed a larger 
scale implementation study.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: n/a.

DOI: 10.1186/s12904-020-00647-5 
PMCID: PMC7507823
PMID: 32957952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Int J Paediatr Dent. 2021 May;31(3):372-382. doi: 10.1111/ipd.12723. Epub 2020
Sep 30.

Salutogenesis in oral health research in preschool children: A scoping review.

Pitchon A(1), Gomes VE(1), Ferreira EFE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social and Preventive Dentistry, School of Dentistry, Federal
University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Oral health research in children has focused both on identifying the 
risk factors for dental caries and on the impact the disease has on children's
life.
AIM: Identifying studies that used the salutogenic theory to investigate positive
aspects to promote a healthy condition in preschool children.
DESIGN: A literature scoping review was conducted to answer the question: 'What
has been produced in scientific literature about children's oral health with a
salutogenic theoretical reference?' The checklist preferred reporting items for
systematic reviews and meta-analyses extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR)
was applied. The research was conducted on the databases PubMed, Scopus, and Web 
of Science with no language, design, country or date restrictions. Three
independent reviewers selected the studies to be included in the research,
extracted data, and assessed the studies' contribution to the review.
RESULTS: Among the 38 studies retained, 10 were included, those were published
between 2009 and 2018: five in Brazil, two in the United States of America, and
one in Canada, China and India, respectively. All articles were published in
English language. Nine studies investigated the relation between the
parents'/caretakers' sense of coherence and aspects related to the children's
oral health condition. One study investigated health factors among the parents of
caries-free children.
CONCLUSION: Salutogenic orientation must be included in oral health research, so 
that salutary and risk factors may coexist, contributing to a new perspective for
oral health promotion among children.

© 2020 BSPD, IAPD and John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ipd.12723 
PMID: 32955769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Aging Res. 2020 Sep 1;2020:7597524. doi: 10.1155/2020/7597524. eCollection
2020.

Effects of the Intervention "Reflective STRENGTH-Giving Dialogues" for Older
Adults Living with Long-Term Pain: A Pilot Study.

Hedén L(1), Berglund M(2), Gillsjö C(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Caring Science, Work Life and Social Welfare, University of Borås, 
Borås, Sweden.
(2)School of Health Sciences, University of Skövde, Skövde, Sweden.
(3)College of Nursing, University of Rhode Island, South Kingstown, RI, USA.

Background: Long-term musculoskeletal pain is a major, often undertreated,
disabling health problem among an increasing number of older adults. Reflective
STRENGTH-giving dialogues (STRENGTH) may be a tool to support older adults living
with long-term pain. The main aim of this pilot study was to investigate the
immediate and longitudinal effect of the intervention STRENGTH on levels of pain,
wellbeing, occurrence of depression symptoms, and sense of coherence (SOC) among 
community-dwelling older adults suffering from musculoskeletal pain compared to a
control group.
Methods: The study was semiexperimental with an intervention group and a control 
group. The effect of a single STRENGTH intervention was reported on the Numeric
Rating Scale (NRS) regarding pain and wellbeing. To evaluate the longitudinal
effect of STRENGTH, using the Brief Pain Inventory-Short Form (BPI-SF), the
Geriatric Depression Scale-20 (GDS-20), SOC-13 at baseline (T1), and six months
after the intervention/no intervention (T2), a total of 30 older adults, aged 72 
to 97 years (Mdn 86 years), were included consecutively and fulfilled the
intervention series (n = 18) or untreated controls (n = 12).
Results: The intervention with STRENGTH decreases pain (NRS 6 Mdn versus NRS 4
Mdn, p < 0.001) and increases wellbeing (NRS 7 Mdn versus NRS 8 Mdn, p < 0.001). 
After a six-month study period with STRENGTH, no longitudinal effect difference
was found compared to baseline. Compared to the control group, there was an
increasing trend between decreased pain level and increased SOC level for
STRENGTH intervention.
Conclusions: This pilot study supports STRENGTH's effect as a pain-alleviating
model that provides a decrease in pain levels and an increase of wellbeing in
older adults with long-term pain. STRENGTH dialogues could be a useful
intervention to provide individually holistic care in older adults living with
long-term pain.

Copyright © 2020 Lena Hedén et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/7597524 
PMCID: PMC7481915
PMID: 32953174 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts
of interest regarding the publication of this paper.


262. Zdr Varst. 2020 Jun 25;59(3):155-163. doi: 10.2478/sjph-2020-0020. eCollection
2020 Sep.

Validation of the Croatian Version of the Sense of Coherence 29-Item Scale in
Croatian Nurses.

Smrekar M(1)(2), Zaletel-Kragelj L(3), Petrak O(1), Franko A(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of Applied Health Sciences Zagreb, Mlinarska cesta 38, 10000
Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Zaloska 4, 1000 Ljubljana,
Slovenia.
(3)University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Chair of Public Health, Zaloska 
4, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(4)University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Clinical Institute of Occupational
Medicine, Poljanski nasip 58, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Introduction: The aim of the study was to validate the Croatian version of the
Sense of Coherence 29-item instrument (SOC-29) within a nursing population.
Methods: The cross-sectional study was conducted between December 2017 and June
2018 at the University Hospital Centre Sisters of Mercy (UHCSM) in Zagreb,
Croatia. A total of 711 nurses participated in this study. Internal consistency
reliability was evaluated using Cronbach's alpha coefficient (α), while the
structure of the questionnaire was verified by exploratory factor analysis (EFA) 
(method of extraction: principal component analysis (PCA)) and confirmatory
factor analysis (CFA).
Results: The instrument demonstrated high internal consistency (α=0.885). PCA
analysis has identified five factors that together account for 48% of the
variance. However, the observed factors could not be interpreted. In the CFA,
none of the models fitted well, although the fit of the three-factor model
(CMIN/DF=4.786, CFI=0.767, RMSEA=0.073) was slightly better in comparison with
the one-factor model (CMIN/DF=6.072, CFI=0.685, RMSEA=0.084). As the three-factor
model in PCA has been shown to be uninterpretable, and all three factors were
mutually positive and significantly correlated (correlation coefficients:
0.365-0.521), this indicated a single factor in the background. All items also
showed saturation with the first factor (accounting for 25.7% of the variance).
Conclusions: The Croatian version of the SOC-29 instrument successfully fulfilled
the necessary psychometric criteria for being used on the population of Croatian 
nurses. The study proposes that potential users use the single-factor structure.

Publisher: Želeli smo ovrednotiti, ali je hrvaška verzija dolgega vprašalnika o
občutku koherentnosti (SOC-29) uporabna v raziskavah na področju promocije
zdravja med hrvaškimi medicinskimi sestrami, zato smo si zadali za cilj oceniti
izbrane psihometrične lastnosti instrumenta v tej določeni poklicni skupini tako 
z vidika zanesljivosti kot tudi z vidika veljavnosti.Presečna raziskava, v kateri
je sodelovalo 711 medicinskih sester, je bila izvedena v obdobju od decembra 2017
do junija 2018 v Univerzitetnem kliničnem centru Sestre milosrdnice v Zagrebu na 
Hrvaškem. Na področju zanesljivosti se je ocenjevala notranja skladnost.
Uporabili smo Cronbachov alfa koeficient (α). Na področju veljavnosti se je
ocenjevala struktura vprašalnika. Preverjala se je najprej s preiskovalno
faktorsko analizo (EFA) (z metodo analize glavnih komponent (PCA) kot metodo
ekstrakcije dejavnikov) in nato še s potrditveno faktorsko analizo (CFA).Na
področju zanesljivosti je analiza pokazala visoko notranjo skladnost instrumenta 
(α = 0,885). Na področju veljavnosti je analiza PCA pokazala pet dejavnikov, s
katerimi se je skupaj dalo pojasniti 48,0 % variance, vendar opazovanih
dejavnikov ni bilo mogoče razložiti. Tudi ko smo PCA omejili na tri dejavnike,
teh ni bilo mogoče razložiti. V CFA noben od modelov ni najbolje ustrezal, čeprav
je bila ustreznost trifaktorskega modela (CMIN/DF = 4,786, CFI = 0,767, RMSEA =
0,073) nekoliko boljša v primerjavi z enofaktorskim modelom (CMIN/DF = 6,072, CFI
= 0,685, RMSEA = 0,084). Ker se trifaktorskega modela v PCA ni dalo
interpretirati, prav tako pa so bili vsi trije dejavniki medsebojno pozitivni in 
so bistveno korelirani (korelacijski koeficienti: 0,365–0,521), je to kazalo en
sam dejavnik v ozadju. Vse postavke so pokazale tudi nasičenost s prvim
dejavnikom, s katerim se je dalo pojasniti 25,7 % variance.Hrvaška različica
instrumenta SOC-29 je uspešno izpolnila potrebna psihometrična merila za uporabo 
v populaciji hrvaških medicinskih sester, njenim potencialnim uporabnikom pa je
predlagana uporaba enofaktorske strukture, ki jo je zagovarjal tudi avtor
instrumenta, prav tako pa so prednost enofaktorski strukturi dali tudi številni
drugi avtorji.
© 2020 Martina Smrekar et al., published by Sciendo.

DOI: 10.2478/sjph-2020-0020 
PMCID: PMC7478088
PMID: 32952716 

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no
conflicts of interest.


263. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2021 Feb;36(2):360-367. doi: 10.1002/gps.5433. Epub
2020 Sep 25.

Positive and negative experiences of caregiving in dementia: The role of sense of
coherence.

Gonçalves-Pereira M(1)(2), Zarit SH(3), Papoila AL(1)(4), Mateos R(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Nova Medical School/Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Universidade Nova de
Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Comprehensive Health Research Centre (CHRC), Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Department of Human Development and Family Studies, Penn State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Centre of Statistics and its Applications, University of Lisbon (CEAUL),
Lisbon, Portugal.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, University of Santiago de Compostela (USC), Santiago
de Compostela, Spain.
(6)Psychogeriatric Unit, CHUS University Hospital, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

OBJECTIVES: Sense of coherence (SOC) is increasingly recognized as an important
health determinant, particularly for mental health. Part of the evidence comes
from informal caregivers in diverse clinical conditions. The extent to which SOC 
influences caregiving outcomes, however, is relatively under-researched in
dementia, particularly regarding positive experiences. We analysed the
association of SOC with dementia caregivers' subjective burden, psychological
distress and positive aspects of care.
METHODS/DESIGN: This is a secondary analysis of cross-sectional data from the
Lisbon study of Families of Persons with Dementia, involving a convenience sample
of 99 primary caregivers of community-dwelling patients of neurology and
psychiatry services. SOC was assessed with the Orientation for Life Scale.
Measures of caregivers' outcomes were: the Zarit Burden Interview, the General
Health Questionnaire for psychological distress and the Positive Aspects of
Caregiving scale. Analyses controlled for demographics, caregiving arrangements, 
objective burden, social support, patients' neuropsychiatric symptoms and
dementia stage.
RESULTS: Lower SOC was associated with higher psychological distress (p = 0.001).
No significant associations were found for subjective burden (p = 0.081) or
positive aspects of caregiving (p = 0.688). Additional analyses showed that lower
SOC was associated with less emotional support (p < 0.001) and past psychiatric
illness (p = 0.044).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings support previous research suggesting that SOC is
protective for psychological distress, and extend evidence to the positive
aspects of care in dementia. The cross-sectional design and small-scale
convenience sampling preclude both causality presumptions and generalizability.
SOC assessments may be useful to define subgroups of dementia caregivers at risk 
for anxiety and depression.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.5433 
PMID: 32944997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


264. BMC Geriatr. 2020 Sep 17;20(1):342. doi: 10.1186/s12877-020-01735-0.

Prevalence and characteristics of older adults with a persistent death wish
without severe illness: a large cross-sectional survey.

Hartog ID(1), Zomers ML(2), van Thiel GJMW(3), Leget C(1), Sachs APE(4),
Uiterwaal CSPM(5), van den Berg V(1), van Wijngaarden E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Care Ethics, University of Humanistic Studies, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medical Humanities, Julius Center for Health Sciences and
Primary Care, University Medical Center, P.O. Box 85060, 3508 AB, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. m.l.zomers@umcutrecht.nl.
(3)Department of Medical Humanities, Julius Center for Health Sciences and
Primary Care, University Medical Center, P.O. Box 85060, 3508 AB, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Family Medicine, Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary
Care, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary
Care, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Some older persons develop a persistent death wish without being
severely ill, often referred to as "completed life" or "tiredness of life". In
the Netherlands and Belgium, the question whether these persons should have legal
options for euthanasia or physician-assisted suicide (EAS) is intensely debated. 
Our main aim was to investigate the prevalence and characteristics of older
adults with a persistent death wish without severe illness, as the lack of this
knowledge is a crucial problem in de debate.
METHODS: We conducted a survey among a representative sample of 32,477 Dutch
citizens aged 55+, comprising questions about health, existential issues and the 
nature of the death wish. Descriptive statistics were used to describe the group 
with a persistent death wish and no severe illness (PDW-NSI) and several
subgroups.
RESULTS: A total of 21,294 respondents completed the questionnaire (response rate
65.6%). We identified 267 respondents (1.25%) as having a persistent death wish
and no severe illness (PDW-NSI). PDW-NSI did not only occur among the oldest old.
Although qualifying themselves as "not severely ill", those with PDW-NSI reported
considerable health problems. A substantial minority of the PDW-NSI-group
reported having had a death wish their whole lives. Within the group PDW-NSI 155 
(0.73%) respondents had an active death wish, of which 36 (0.17% of the total
response) reported a wish to actually end their lives. Thus, a death wish did not
always equal a wish to actually end one's life. Moreover, the death wishes were
often ambiguous. For example, almost half of the PDW-NSI-group (49.1%) indicated 
finding life worthwhile at this moment.
CONCLUSIONS: The identified characteristics challenge the dominant "completed
life" or "tiredness of life" image of healthy persons over the age of 75 who,
overseeing their lives, reasonably decide they would prefer to die. The results
also show that death wishes without severe illness are often ambiguous and do not
necessarily signify a wish to end one's life. It is of great importance to
acknowledge these nuances and variety in the debate and in clinical practice, to 
be able to adequately recognize the persons involved and tailor to their needs.

DOI: 10.1186/s12877-020-01735-0 
PMCID: PMC7495831
PMID: 32943009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


265. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2020 Sep 15;20(1):226. doi: 10.1186/s12911-020-01246-3.

An app for supporting older people receiving home care - usage, aspects of health
and health literacy: a quasi-experimental study.

Göransson C(1)(2), Wengström Y(3)(4), Hälleberg-Nyman M(5), Langius-Eklöf A(4),
Ziegert K(6), Blomberg K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Health, School of Health Sciences, Örebro University, 
701 82, Örebro, Sweden. carina.goransson@hh.se.
(2)School of Health and Welfare, Halmstad University, 302 18, Halmstad, Sweden.
carina.goransson@hh.se.
(3)Theme Cancer, Karolinska University Hospital, 141 86, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Division of Nursing,
Karolinska, Institutet, 171 77, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Faculty of Medicine and Health, School of Health Sciences, Örebro University, 
701 82, Örebro, Sweden.
(6)School of Health and Welfare, Halmstad University, 302 18, Halmstad, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: During the last decade, there has been an increase in studies
describing use of mHealth, using smartphones with apps, in the healthcare system 
by a variety of populations. Despite this, few interventions including apps are
targeting older people receiving home care. Developing mobile technology to its
full potential of being interactive in real time remains a challenge. The current
study is part of a larger project for identifying and managing health concerns
via an app by using real-time data. The aim of the study was to describe older
people's usage of an app and to evaluate the impact of usage on aspects of health
and health literacy over time.
METHODS: A quasi-experimental design was employed. Seventeen older people
self-reported health concerns via Interaktor twice a week for 3-months and
answered questionnaires at baseline, the end of the intervention and at a 6-month
follow-up. Logged data on app usage and data on Sense of Coherence, Health Index,
Nutrition Form for the Elderly, Geriatric Depression Scale-20, Swedish
Communicative and Critical Health Literacy and Swedish Functional Health Literacy
were collected and analysed using descriptive and non-parametric inferential
statistics.
RESULTS: The median usage of the app as intended was 96%. Pain was one of the
most reported health concerns and was also the health concern that triggered an
alert (n = 33). The older people's communicative and critical health literacy
improved significantly over time. Regarding the scores of Sense of Coherence,
Health Index, Nutritional Form for the Elderly, Geriatric Depression Scale-20 and
Swedish Functional Health Literacy scale, there were no significant differences
over time.
CONCLUSIONS: The high app usage showed that an app may be a suitable tool for
some older people living alone and receiving home care. The results indicate that
the usage of Interaktor can support older people by significantly improving their
communicative and critical health literacy. Aspects of health were not shown to
be affected by the usage of the app. Further research with larger sample is
needed for evaluation the effect on health literacy, and which aspects of health 
of importance to support by an app.

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-020-01246-3 
PMCID: PMC7493150
PMID: 32933500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Interpers Violence. 2020 Sep 15:886260520958660. doi: 10.1177/0886260520958660.
[Epub ahead of print]

Group-based Compassion-focused Therapy on Experiential Avoidance,
Meaning-in-life, and Sense of Coherence in Female Survivors of Intimate Partner
Violence with PTSD: A Randomized Controlled Trial.

Daneshvar S(1), Shafiei M(2), Basharpoor S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shiraz University, Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Lorestan University, Khurramabad, Iran.
(3)University of Mohaghegh Ardabili, Ardabil, Iran.

The current study was carried out to investigate the effects of
compassion-focused therapy (CFT) on experiential avoidance, meaning-in-life, and 
sense of coherence (SoC) in women suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) due to the intimate partner violence (IPV).42 women suffering from PTSD
due to the IPV exposure were randomized to the two groups of experimental and
control (21 per group). All participants completed the questionnaires of
experiential avoidance, meaning-in-life, and SoC as pre-test measures. The
experimental group received eight sessions of CFT, while the controls did not
receive any treatment. After that, all subjects responded to the questionnaires
of experiential avoidance, meaning-in-life, and SoC as the post-test measures.
Data were analyzed using one-way repeated measures MANOVA.Subjects of the
experimental group indicated a greater reduction in post-test scores of
experiential avoidance, and a significant rise in the level of meaning-in-life
and its subscales including the presence of meaning-in-life and search for
meaning-in-life when compared to the controls. Nevertheless, there was no change 
in the level of SoC as a function of CFT.Applying CFT can result in reducing
experiential avoidance and raising the meaning of life in women with PTSD due to 
IPV exposure. CFT is highly recommended to strengthen the well-being of patients 
with PTSD and reduce the PTSD symptoms.

DOI: 10.1177/0886260520958660 
PMID: 32933348 


267. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Sep 13;17(18). pii: E6667. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17186667.

Salutogenesis and Coping: Ways to Overcome Stress and Conflict.

Braun-Lewensohn O(1), Mayer CH(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Interdisciplinary Studies, Conflict Management & Resolution
Program, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva 8410501, Israel.
(2)Department of Industrial Psychology and People Management, Auckland Park
Campus, University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg 2006, South Africa.
(3)Institut für Therapeutische Kommunikation und Sprachgebrauch, Europa
Universität Viadrina, Logenstrasse 11, 15230 Frankfurt (Oder), Germany.

This Special Issue aims to explore the concepts of stress, coping resources, and 
coping strategies, which are rooted in several theories, such as the stress and
coping theory and the salutogenesis theory, and to understand how their core
constructs are manifested in various ethnic and cultural groups around the world.
This Special Issue includes 13 articles on salutogenesis and coping from
different disciplinary, socio-cultural, historical, political, and economic
perspectives. These articles address salutogenesis on the individual,
organizational, and societal levels. The empirical studies are based in different
societal and national contexts and refer to different ethnic groups within those 
contexts. Other studies examine international leaders in industry from a global
perspective and present a systemic review of the literature concerning
individuals in specific professions, such as nursing. The studies in the current 
Special Issue set the ground for continuing research toward even more
comprehensive theoretical grounds; studies that incorporate several theoretical
backgrounds and explore a broad theoretical model that may help us to understand 
successful adaptation in various contexts. In summary, results of studies that
incorporate these theories may promote our understanding of the effects of coping
resources and strategies, including acculturation strategies used among minority 
groups for positive adaptation.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17186667 
PMCID: PMC7557564
PMID: 32933161  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Sep 11;17(18). pii: E6625. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17186625.

Quality of Life and Intention to Return among Former Residents of Tomioka Town,
Fukushima Prefecture 9 Years after the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Accident.

Orita M(1), Taira Y(1), Matsunaga H(1), Maeda M(2), Takamura N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Global Health, Medicine and Welfare, Atomic Bomb Disease
Institute, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki 8528523, Japan.
(2)Department of Disaster Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Fukushima Medical
University, Fukushima 960-1247, Japan.

We evaluated the association between health-related quality of life (HR-QOL) and 
intent to return home among former residents of Tomioka Town, Fukushima
Prefecture 9 years after the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident to support the
recovery of the community after the accident. We conducted a questionnaire survey
asking residents about their intention to return to their original home, risk
perception for radiation exposure, HR-QOL using the HR-QOL Short Form 8 (SF-8),
and sense of coherence using the Sense of Coherence Scale (SOC-13). Among the
1029 residents, a total of 138 (13%) had already returned to Tomioka (group 1),
223 (22%) were undecided (group 2), and 668 (65%) had decided not to return
(group 3). Group 2 had poorer HR-QOL than groups 1 and 3, especially physical
function, body pain, general health, social functioning, and mental health. The
ratio of residents with a better sense of coherence was significantly higher in
group 1 than in groups 2 and 3. Our present study indicated poorer HR-QOL among
residents who were undecided about returning home. It is necessary to provide a
model for a multidisciplinary approach for the public during the recovery phase
of a nuclear accident.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17186625 
PMCID: PMC7559810
PMID: 32932913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


269. West J Nurs Res. 2021 May;43(5):459-467. doi: 10.1177/0193945920957229. Epub 2020
Sep 15.

Correlates of Symptom Burden of Hemodialysis Patients.

Song YY(1), Chen L(2), Yu WW(2), Wang WX(3), Yang DJ(1), Jiang XL(1).

Author information: 
(1)West China School of Nursing/West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
Sichuan, China.
(2)Hemodialysis Center, Department of Nephrology, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

This cross-sectional study assessed the overall symptom burden, including the
prevalence, frequency, severity, and distress of symptoms among hemodialysis
patients, and explored the relationship between demographic characteristics,
clinical variables, self-management, sense of coherence, social support, and
symptom burden in these patients. Herein, a regression analysis was performed to 
determine associations with symptom burden. The mean score of symptom burden
among the participants (n = 382) was 74.12, with an average number of 12
symptoms. The analysis revealed that self-management, sense of coherence, and
social support were negatively associated with the overall symptom burden. The
multiple regression model showed that 48.6% of the variance in symptom burden was
explained by meaningfulness, emotional management, daily urine output, subjective
support, gender, and manageability. These findings contribute to the knowledge of
symptom burden among hemodialysis patients and some new predictors
(self-management, sense of coherence, and social support) of their symptom
burden.

DOI: 10.1177/0193945920957229 
PMID: 32930067 


270. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;78(1):117-126. doi: 10.3233/JAD-200350.

Caregivers' Sense of Coherence: Implications on Direct and Indirect Costs of
Dementia Care.

Turró-Garriga O(1)(2), Viñas-Díez V(3), Conde-Sala JL(1)(3), Calvó-Perxas L(1),
Cullell-Juncà M(4), Mas-Vall-Llosera G(4), Flaqué M(5), Turon-Estrada A(2),
Juvinyà-Canal D(6), Mioshi E(7), Garre-Olmo J(1)(2)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Aging, Disability and Health Research Group of Girona Biomedical Research
Institute [IdIBGI], Salt, Catalonia.
(2)Registry of Dementia of Girona (ReDeGi), Institut d'Assistència Sanitària,
Salt, Catalonia.
(3)Faculty of Psychology, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia.
(4)Centre Socio Sanitari Bernat Jaume, Fundació Salut Empordà, Figueres,
Catalonia.
(5)Centre Socio Sanitari Palamós Gent Gran, Serveis Sanitaris Integrats del Baix 
Empordà, Palamós, Catalonia.
(6)Health Promotion Chair, University of Girona, Girona, Catalonia.
(7)School of Health Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, United Kingdom.
(8)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Girona, Girona, Catalonia.

BACKGROUND: Dementia care is associated with physical, emotional, and monetary
impact on the informal carers providing unpaid care. Differences in the personal 
characteristics of caregivers may help explain the variations in the costs of
dementia care.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to analyze the effect of caregivers' sense
of coherence (SOC) on direct and indirect costs in dementia care.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted in community dwelling caregivers
of patients with Alzheimer's disease. Data of healthcare services were obtained
from clinical registries, and information was collected from caregivers regarding
their use of social care resources and time spent caregiving. The transformation 
of all costs into Euros was made assigning a fixed cost of 10.29 € /h and 16.24 €
/h for assisting in instrumental and basic activities of daily living,
respectively. Caregivers' SOC was assessed using the Orientation to Life
Questionnaire (OLQ-13). Adjusted regression models were developed, with different
types of costs as dependent variables.
RESULTS: A sample of 147 caregivers was recruited. The mean OLQ-13 score was 73.3
points (SD = 11.6). The regression models showed a small association between
caregivers' SOC and direct costs, mainly linked to the use of social care
resources (r2 = 0.429; β= -15.6 € /month), and a greater association between SOC 
and indirect costs (r2 = 0.562; β= -222.3 € /month).
CONCLUSION: Increasing caregivers' SOC could reduce dementia care costs by
decreasing the use of social care resources and caregiving time.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-200350 
PMID: 32925037 


271. Eur J Psychotraumatol. 2020 Jun 5;11(1):1759984. doi:
10.1080/20008198.2020.1759984.

Psychometric properties of the Dutch revised sense of coherence scale in a
firefighter sample.

Egberink IJL(1), Harms T(2), Lommen MJJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychometrics and Statistics, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Psychology and Experimental Psychopathology, University
of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Background: Sense of coherence (SOC) has been associated with resilience to
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and seems to be a promising factor in
primary prevention of PTSD in high risk populations.
Objective: The present study evaluated the psychometric properties of the Dutch
revised Sense of Coherence Scale (SOC-R) in a sample of N = 527 firefighters.
Method: To investigate the internal structure of this 13-item scale, a Mokken
scale analysis and an exploratory factor analysis were conducted (i.e. parallel
analysis based on MRFA).
Results: The combined results of these analyses suggested that a one-factor
solution with 10 out of 13 items was most compelling for our firefighter sample. 
Reliability estimates for the 10-item version increased compared to the 13-item
version (13-item: α = .82, λ2 = .83; 10-item: α = λ2 = .85). As expected, the
Dutch version showed positive associations with resilience (convergent validity),
and low correlations with neuroticism and extraversion (discriminant validity).
Conclusions: The one-factor solution of the Dutch SOC-R with 10 items (excluding 
item 2, item 3, and item 6) is most convincing. The use of this scale might be
specifically interesting regarding its potential to primary prevention of
trauma-related psychopathology in high-risk samples.

Publisher: Antecedentes: El sentido de coherencia (SOC) se ha asociado con la
resiliencia ante el trastorno de estrés postraumático (TEPT) y parece ser un
factor prometedor en la prevención primaria del TEPT en poblaciones de alto
riesgo.Objetivo: El presente estudio evaluó las propiedades psicométricas de la
Escala revisada holandesa de Sentido de Coherencia (SOC-R) en una muestra de N = 
527 bomberos.Método: Para investigar la estructura interna de esta escala de 13
ítems, se realizó un análisis de escala Mokken y un análisis factorial
exploratorio (es decir, análisis paralelo basado en MRFA).Resultados: Los
resultados combinados de estos análisis sugirieron que una solución de un factor 
con 10 de los 13 elementos fue más convincente para nuestra muestra de bomberos. 
Las estimaciones de confiabilidad para la versión de 10 ítems aumentaron en
comparación con la versión de 13 ítems (13 ítems: α = .82, λ2 = .83; 10 ítems: α 
= λ2 = .85). Como se esperaba, la versión holandesa mostró asociaciones positivas
con la resiliencia (validez convergente) y bajas correlaciones con neuroticismo y
extraversión (validez discriminante).Conclusiones: La solución de un factor de la
SOC-R holandesa con 10 ítems (excluyendo el ítem 2, el ítem 3 y el ítem 6) es muy
convincente. El uso de esta escala podría ser específicamente interesante en
cuanto a su potencial para la prevención primaria de psicopatología relacionada
con el trauma en muestras de alto riesgo.Publisher: 背景:心理一致感 (SOC) 与创伤后应激障碍
(PTSD) 的心理韧性相关, 并且似乎是PTSD高风险人群的一级预防中有前景的因素。目标:本研究在一个527名消防员组成的样本中,
评估了荷兰修订版心理一致感量表 (SOC-R) 的心理测量学性质。方法:为考查13条目量表的内部结构, 进行了Mokken量表分析和探索性因素分析
(即基于MRFA的平行分析) 。结果:这些分析的综合结果表明, 对于我们的消防员样本,
在13个条目中有10个单因素的解最令人信服。10条目版本的信度估计值较13条目版本相比有所提高 (13条目:α=.82, λ2 = 0.83; 10条目:λ2
=.85) 。同预期一样, 荷兰语版本展现出与心理韧性 (收敛效度) 及与神经质和外向性 (区分效度) 的正相关。结论:荷兰SOC-R的10条目单因素解
(不包括条目2, 条目3和条目6) 最具说服力。该量表在高风险样本中对于创伤相关精神疾病的一级预防的应用潜力, 值得深入探讨。.
© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor &
Francis Group.

DOI: 10.1080/20008198.2020.1759984 
PMCID: PMC7448896
PMID: 32922683 

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported by
the authors.


272. Clin Interv Aging. 2020 Aug 25;15:1481-1491. doi: 10.2147/CIA.S260635.
eCollection 2020.

The Sense of Coherence, Self-Perception of Aging and the Occurrence of Depression
Among the Participants of the University of the Third Age Depending on
Socio-Demographic Factors.

Zielińska-Więczkowska H(1), Sas K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social and Medical Sciences, Nicolaus Copernicus University
Collegium Medicum in Bydgoszcz, Bydgoszcz, Poland.

Purpose: The aim of the study was to assess the relationship between the sense of
coherence and self-perception of aging and the risk of depression among attendees
of the University of the Third Age (U3A). The influence of socio-demographic
factors was studied.
Participants and Methods: The study involved 315 attendees of the U3A aged on
average 68.4 years, age range 60-82 years old. The overwhelming majority were
women (91.7%). Cross-sectional research was conducted using standardized
questionnaires - the SOC-29 scale, the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS - brief
version) and the author's own questionnaire regarding self-perception of aging.
Results: The study participants showed an average level of sense of coherence
(130.7± 23.2). The highest number of people obtained average results of sense of 
coherence, both in terms of global SOC (75.2%) and its components. The highest
scores on the SOC-29 scale were found for the sense of comprehensibility (41.3%).
The mean value of the self-perception of aging was 69.0±16.0 and indicates the
lower range of results for positive attitude. Nearly ¾ (72.1%) of the respondents
had a positive self-perception of aging. The values of the scale of
self-perception of aging showed a statistically significant relation to the
global level of sense of coherence and its components (p<0.001). In people
without depression, positive self-perception of aging was significantly more
frequent than among participants with depression of increasing intensity.
Education was significantly correlated with the results of the SOC-29 scale, the 
self-perception of aging scale and the GDS scale.
Conclusion: From the U3A research group, better educated elderly people have a
higher sense of coherence and show a more positive self-perception of aging.
Moreover, these people are less likely to show signs of senile depression.

© 2020 Zielińska-Więczkowska and Sas.

DOI: 10.2147/CIA.S260635 
PMCID: PMC7457795
PMID: 32921994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.


273. Soc Sci Med. 2020 Nov;264:113322. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2020.113322. Epub 2020
Aug 27.

Parental social-cognitive correlates of preschoolers' oral hygiene behavior: A
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Smith SR(1), Kroon J(2), Schwarzer R(3), Hamilton K(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Applied Psychology and Menzies Health Institute Queensland, Griffith
University, Mt Gravatt Campus, Queensland, Australia. Electronic address:
stephanie.smith4@griffithuni.edu.au.
(2)School of Dentistry and Oral Health, Griffith University, Gold Coast Campus,
Queensland, Australia. Electronic address: j.kroon@griffith.edu.au.
(3)Department of Psychology, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany; SWPS
University of Social Sciences and Humanities, Wroclaw, Poland. Electronic
address: ralf.schwarzer@fu-berlin.de.
(4)School of Applied Psychology and Menzies Health Institute Queensland, Griffith
University, Mt Gravatt Campus, Queensland, Australia. Electronic address:
kyra.hamilton@griffith.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Regular and consistent parental involvement in children's oral
hygiene practices is crucial to prevent oral diseases in young children. This
emphasizes the need for interventions targeting parental-supervised oral hygiene 
behavior. To inform the design of future interventions, this meta-analysis aimed 
to identify the parental social-cognitive factors associated with oral hygiene
behavior of preschoolers.
METHOD: Five bibliographic databases were searched. A study was eligible for
inclusion when it reported an association between a parental social-cognitive
factor and an oral hygiene behavior in the targeted age cohort. Meta-analyses
were performed when there were at least four independent effect sizes (k > 3).
RESULTS: Of the 5945 records identified, 25 studies contained eligible data to be
included in four meta-analyses: attitude (k = 12); self-efficacy (k = 12);
intention (k = 6), and sense of coherence (k = 5). The results showed that
greater frequency of preschoolers' oral hygiene behavior is significantly
associated with parental attitudes (r+ = 0.18), self-efficacy (r+ = 0.34), and
intention (r+ = 0.29), and not significantly associated with parental sense of
coherence (r+ = 0.08).
CONCLUSION: Self-efficacy, attitudes, and intention were identified as
significant correlates of parental-supervised oral hygiene behavior. However,
this is a limited evidence base and many social-cognitive factors, such as
self-regulatory processes including planning and action control, have yet to be
explored in this context. The significant social-cognitive correlates identified 
in this study, as well as potential other self-regulatory factors, should be
targeted in future intervention studies aimed at improving this important
preventive behavior.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2020.113322 
PMID: 32916333  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


274. PLoS One. 2020 Sep 10;15(9):e0238320. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0238320.
eCollection 2020.

A high burden of adverse life events and poor coping mechanisms experienced by
urban-dwelling black South Africans.

Peer N(1)(2), Lombard C(3)(4)(5), Steyn K(6), Levitt N(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Non-communicable Diseases Research Unit, South African Medical Research
Council (SAMRC), Durban, South Africa.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town (UCT), Cape Town, South
Africa.
(3)Biostatistics Unit, SAMRC, Tygerberg, South Africa.
(4)School of Public Health and Family Medicine, UCT, Cape Town, South Africa.
(5)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Division of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Department of Global Health, Stellenbosch University, Tygerberg,
South Africa.
(6)Department of Medicine, Chronic Disease Initiative for Africa, UCT, Cape Town,
South Africa.

AIM: In view of the current context of poverty and socio-economic inequalities
and the high and rising burdens of HIV infection and non-communicable diseases in
South Africa, this study aims to describe the distribution of adverse life events
(ALEs) by age and gender, and examine the socio-demographic characteristics,
psychosocial coping mechanisms, risky lifestyle behaviours and family burden of
HIV-related ill-health associated with ALEs in 25-74-year-old black residents of 
Cape Town.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In a random cross-sectional sample, 12 ALEs, tobacco and
alcohol use, sense of coherence (SOC), locus of control (LOC) and impact of HIV
in the family were determined by administered questionnaires. Data analyses
included descriptive statistics adjusted for the realised sample. Multivariable
linear regression models assessed the independent associations of increasing
number of ALEs.
RESULTS: Among 1099 participants, mean lifetime score of ALE categories examined 
was 6.1 ±2.1 (range 0-12) with men reporting significantly higher number of
events compared with women (p<0.001). The most frequent ALE was the death of a
loved one (88.5%) followed by a major financial crisis (81.2%) with no trend
across gender or age group. In the multivariable linear regression model,
increasing ALEs were significantly associated with male gender, unemployment,
having spent >50% of life in urban areas, >7 years of education, problematic
alcohol use and poorer psychosocial coping mechanisms defined by low SOC and LOC.
All four variables pertaining to HIV-related burden of ill-health in the family
were significantly associated with increasing ALEs.
CONCLUSIONS: Considering that lower SOC and LOC and problem drinking were
significantly linked to ALEs, policymakers need to formulate strategies that
improve coping mechanisms and promote problem-solving behaviours, target the high
burden of alcohol misuse and address unemployment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0238320 
PMCID: PMC7482925
PMID: 32911529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Naomi Levitt has received honoraria from Novartis
for serving on the steering committee for the Navigator Trial and travel support 
from Novo Nordisk, Eli Lilly Laboratories and Sanofi Aventis. All other authors
report no potential conflicts of interest, including specific financial
interests, relevant to the subject of this manuscript. This does not alter our
adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


275. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Sep 7;17(18). pii: E6491. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17186491.

The Severity of Traumatic Stress Associated with COVID-19 Pandemic, Perception of
Support, Sense of Security, and Sense of Meaning in Life among Nurses: Research
Protocol and Preliminary Results from Poland.

Nowicki GJ(1), Ślusarska B(1), Tucholska K(2), Naylor K(3), Chrzan-Rodak A(1),
Niedorys B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine and Community Nursing, Medical University of
Lublin, Staszica 6 Str., PL-20-081 Lublin, Poland.
(2)Institute of Applied Psychology, Faculty of Management and Social
Communication, Jagiellonian University in Krakow, Lojasiewicza 4 Str., PL-30-348 
Krakow, Poland.
(3)Department of Didactics and Medical Simulation, Medical University of Lublin, 
Chodźki 4 Str., PL-20-093 Lublin, Poland.

The COVID-19 pandemic can not only affect physical health, but also mental
health, resulting in sleep problems, depression, and traumatic stress. Our
research investigates the level of posttraumatic stress, perceived social
support, opinions on positive and negative consequences of the pandemic, sense of
security and sense of meaning among nurses in the face of this new and not fully 
understood global epidemiological phenomenon. For this purpose, computer-assisted
web interviews were conducted between May 1 and May 15, 2020. Participating
nurses completed the following research tools: The Impact Event Scale-Revised
(IES-R), The Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support (MSPSS), The
Changes in Outlook Questionnaire (CIOQ), The Safety Experience Questionnaire
(SEQ) and The Meaning in Life Questionnaire (MLQ). Three hundred and twenty-five 
nurses of an average age of 39.18 ± 11.16 years and working throughout Poland
joined the study. The average overall IES-R score in the study group was 1.78 ±
0.65. Among the dimensions of traumatic stress, the highest score was obtained in
the "avoidance" dimension was 1.86 ± 0.73. Amongst participating nurses, the
highest support rates were provided by significant others (22.58 ± 5.22). Higher 
average scores were noted among participants in the subscale measuring positive
psychological changes (18.56 ± 4.04). The mean MLQ score was 5.33 ± 0.87. A
slightly higher result was observed in the subscale "presence" (5.35 ± 1.14). The
results of the research implemented during the period of severe psychological
pressure associated with the COVID-19 pandemic provided information on symptoms
of traumatic stress in the examined group of nurses. Their sense of security has 
been lowered and accompanied by an intensified reflection on issues concerning
security. However, their current sense of meaning in life remains higher than the
tendency to searching for it. The surveyed nurses received individual support
mostly from significant others (i.e., other than family and friends). They see
positive changes resulting from painful experiences related to the COVID-19
pandemic, which can be characterized by adaptation in the form of post-traumatic 
growth.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17186491 
PMCID: PMC7559728
PMID: 32906590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Sci Total Environ. 2021 Jan 10;751:141727. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.141727. 
Epub 2020 Aug 18.

On the linkage between urban heat island and urban pollution island: Three-decade
literature review towards a conceptual framework.

Ulpiani G(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Civil Engineering, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia. Electronic address: giulia.ulpiani@sydney.edu.au.

With the doubling of urban population within the next two decades and the
disproportionate growth of megacities, it is critical to explore the synergism
between urban heat and pollution. In this paper, a systematic review is conducted
on the existing knowledge, collected since 1990, on the link between urban heat
island (UHI) and urban pollution island (UPI). Results from 16 countries and 11
Köppen-Geiger climatic zones are perused and compared to delineate methodological
and experimental trends, geographical dependencies and research gaps. Detailed
content analysis is conducted according to five prominent topics: i) the role of 
UHI on temperature-dependent chemistry, ii) the daytime/nighttime variability in 
the UHI-UPI interaction, iii) the role of urban geomorphic types, forms and
growth schemes, iv) future trends and v) primary and secondary effects of UHI
mitigation on urban air quality. Different approaches and observations are
eventually harmonized to outline opportunities and challenges towards the
disentanglement and/or the two-way mitigation of both phenomena. This will help
governments and urban planners to deliver coping strategies and precautions
towards a more salutogenic urban design.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.141727 
PMCID: PMC7434321
PMID: 32890803 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.


277. BMC Public Health. 2020 Sep 4;20(1):1355. doi: 10.1186/s12889-020-09475-x.

Sense of coherence, occupational stressors, and mental health among Japanese high
school teachers in Nagasaki prefecture: a multiple regression analysis.

Kuwato M(1), Hirano Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Nagasaki Rehabilitation College 42, Akasako, Omura, Nagasaki, 856-0048, Japan.
kuwato@nagariha.koyogakuen.ed.jp.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, Nagasaki University 1-7-1, Sakamoto, Nagasaki,
852-8520, Japan.

BACKGROUND: International research has indicated that teachers have an increased 
risk of mental disorders and work-related stress, compared with those working in 
other fields. In Japan, the deterioration of teachers' mental health has recently
become a serious social issue. Teaching is a high-stress occupation, and job
stress can affect teachers' physical and mental health. This study aimed to
determine how sense of coherence, job satisfaction, and workplace social support 
contribute to the mental health status of public and private high school teachers
in Nagasaki Prefecture, Japan.
METHODS: The analytic sample comprised 370 high school teachers from eight public
and three private schools in Nagasaki Prefecture who answered an anonymous survey
comprising the General Health Questionnaire (GHQ-12), which is a measure of
mental health status, and questions regarding sociodemographic characteristics,
occupational stressors, workplace social support systems, job satisfaction, and
sense of coherence. A multiple regression analysis was conducted to identify the 
predictors of mental health.
RESULTS: The survey was sent to 681 people, of whom 370 responded and were
included in the analysis (effective response rate: 54.3%). The analysis indicated
that sense of coherence was the strongest predictor of mental health (β = -.391, 
p < .0001), followed by workload stressors (β = .260, p < .0001), low job control
(β = .099, p = .021), and job satisfaction (β = -.088, p = .040).
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that a greater sense of coherence and job
satisfaction are associated with greater mental health. Meanwhile, workload
stressors and low job control undermined mental health status.

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-020-09475-x 
PMCID: PMC7650266
PMID: 32887598  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


278. BMC Psychiatry. 2020 Sep 4;20(1):435. doi: 10.1186/s12888-020-02822-7.

Predictors of mental health problems in formal and informal caregivers of
patients with Alzheimer's disease.

Sołtys A(1), Tyburski E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychology, University of Szczecin, 69 Krakowska str, 71-017,
Szczecin, Poland.
(2)Institute of Psychology, SWPS University of Social Sciences and Humanities, 10
Kutrzeby str, 61-719, Poznan, Poland. etyburski@swps.edu.pl.

BACKGROUND: Caring for a person with Alzheimer's disease (AD) is associated with 
significant mental burden e.g., depression and anxiety, and difficulties with
social, familial, and professional functioning. To date, few studies have
examined variables which would allow for a comprehensive and detailed study of
the relationship between personal resources and caregiver health status, with a
majority of studies focusing on factors that contribute to increased caregiver's 
burden. Moreover, the available evidence fails to address differences in the
functioning of formal and informal carers. Paying proper attention to the
problems of nursing home staff can help identify important risk factors.
Therefore, this study compared mental health problems in informal and formal
caregivers and examined the relationship between mental resources and mental
health problems in both groups of caregivers.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study examined 100 formal (n = 50) and informal
(n = 50) caregivers of AD patients. Personal resources were measured with the
Social Support Questionnaire (SSQ), the Generalized Self-Efficacy Scale (GSES),
and the Sense of Coherence Questionnaire (SCQ), while mental health was assessed 
with the Depression Assessment Questionnaire (DAQ) and the General Health
Questionnaire (GHQ). Multivariate stepwise regression was performed separately
for both investigated groups.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences between informal and formal
caregivers in terms of psychological variables, i.e., sense of coherence, social 
support, self-efficacy, or mental health problems. In contrast, there were
different significant predictors of mental health problems in both groups.
Comprehensibility (SCQ) was a significant predictor of mental health problems
measured by DAQ and self-efficacy (GSES) was a significant predictor of mental
health problems measured by GHQ in informal caregivers. For formal caregivers,
emotional support (SSQ) and comprehensibility (SCQ) were significant predictors
of mental health problems measured by DAQ, while tangible support (SSQ) and
meaningfulness (SCQ) were significant predictors of mental health problems
measured by GHQ.
CONCLUSIONS: Personal resources are significant predictors of mental health
outcomes in caregivers of AD patients. Preventive actions should therefore
include assessment of factors affecting caregivers' mental health in order to
provide them with necessary care and create appropriate support groups.

DOI: 10.1186/s12888-020-02822-7 
PMCID: PMC7487573
PMID: 32887576  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Gac Sanit. 2020;34 Suppl 1:81-86. doi: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2020.06.014. Epub 2020
Aug 31.

[Evolution and status of the community model of mental health care. SESPAS Report
2020].

[Article in Spanish]

Juliá-Sanchis R(1), Aguilera-Serrano C(2), Megías-Lizancos F(3), Martínez-Riera
JR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Enfermería, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad de
Alicante, San Vicente del Raspeig, Alicante, España.
(2)Unidad de Salud Mental Comunitaria de Motril, Área de Gestión Sanitaria Sur de
Granada, Consejería de Salud y Familias, Junta de Andalucía, Motril, Granada,
España. Electronic address: carlos85enf@gmail.com.
(3)Asociación Española de Enfermería de Salud Mental (AEESME), Madrid, España.
(4)Departamento de Enfermería Comunitaria, Medicina Preventiva y Salud Pública e 
Historia de la Ciencia, Universidad de Alicante, San Vicente del Raspeig,
Alicante, España.

The legislative and ideological transition produced in recent years in Spain has 
favoured the implementation of the community model of mental health care.
However, there is still strong resistance to the inclusion of community
approaches in the care of people with mental health problems and to the
implementation of integrated care and attention with a salutogenic approach. The 
purpose of the following report is to describe the evolution of the community
model of mental health care in the Spanish National Health System and to assess
its current status. Initially, a review of the published national mental health
plans and strategies was carried out. Subsequently, the evaluation was carried
out taking as reference the Consensus Document on the Fundamental Principles and 
Key Elements of Community Mental Health, which establishes the criteria for
evaluating the quality of community care. In the absence of updated plans or
strategies, international reports and recommendations were included. The results 
were grouped into: 1) social perspective, where the controversy about the
capacity of the users to make decisions despite the recognition of their rights
as autonomous moral agents is evident; 2) perspective of the centrality of the
users of mental health care services, where the resistance to the implementation 
of integrated community care and attention is expressed; and 3) professional
perspective in relation to the effectiveness of the interventions and the
community network of care principles, which highlights the need to transform the 
institutions to carry out community interventions in mental health based on
evidence and in an intersectoral, comprehensive, integrated and integrating
manner.

Copyright © 2020 SESPAS. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2020.06.014 
PMCID: PMC7457906
PMID: 32883518 


280. Support Care Cancer. 2021 Apr;29(4):2153-2159. doi: 10.1007/s00520-020-05724-2.
Epub 2020 Sep 3.

Consideration of sense of coherence in a structured communication approach with
stage IV lung cancer patients and their informal caregivers: a qualitative
interview study.

Krug K(#)(1), Bossert J(#)(2)(3), Stooß L(2), Siegle A(3), Villalobos M(3),
Hagelskamp L(3), Jung C(3)(4), Thomas M(3), Wensing M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Practice and Health Services Research, Heidelberg
University Hospital, Im Neuenheimer Feld 130.3, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
katja.krug@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(2)Department of General Practice and Health Services Research, Heidelberg
University Hospital, Im Neuenheimer Feld 130.3, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Thoraxklinik Heidelberg, Department of Thoracic Oncology, Heidelberg
University Hospital, Röntgenstraße 1, 69126, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Medical School Berlin, Calandrellistr. 1-9, 12247, Berlin, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: Salutogenetic aspects are valuable for consideration in
patient-centred care of advanced oncological diseases with a limited life
expectancy. The Milestone Communication Approach (MCA), involving physician-nurse
tandems, addresses specific challenges and needs over the disease trajectory of
patients with stage IV lung cancer and their informal caregivers. This study aims
to explore patients' and informal caregivers' salutogenetic experiences with the 
MCA concept.
METHODS: This qualitative study used face-to-face semi-structured interviews with
patients and informal caregivers. All generated data were audio-recorded,
pseudonymised and transcribed verbatim. Data were structured using Qualitative
Content Analysis. The material was coded deductively into themes related to the
components of sense of coherence (Aaron Antonovsky) and emerging sub-themes. All 
data was managed and organised in MAXQDA.
RESULTS: In 25 interviews, sense of coherence was referred to with all three
components: "Comprehensibility" was supported by information conveyed suitably
for the patients; "meaningfulness" was addressed as accepting the situation; and 
"manageability" led to advance care planning the patients were comfortable with. 
Patients and informal caregivers experienced the interprofessional tandem as an
added value for patient care.
CONCLUSIONS: Participants appreciate the MCA in its support for coping with a
life-limiting disease. Considering salutogenetic aspects facilitates prognostic
awareness and advance care planning. Nevertheless, individual needs of patients
and informal caregivers require an individualised application of the MCA.

DOI: 10.1007/s00520-020-05724-2 
PMCID: PMC7892692
PMID: 32880008  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Aug 31;17(17). pii: E6329. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17176329.

Parents' Reported Experiences When Having a Child with Cataract-Important Aspects
of Self-Management Obtained from the Paediatric Cataract Register (PECARE).

Gyllén J(1)(2), Magnusson G(1)(2), Forsberg A(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 40530 Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Region Västra Götaland, Department of Ophthalmology, Sahlgrenska University
Hospital, 41345 Mölndal, Sweden.
(3)Research Group: Care in High Tech Environments, Institute of Health Sciences, 
Lund University, 22100 Lund, Sweden.
(4)Thoracic Unit, Skåne University Hospital, 22185 Lund, Sweden.

Parents are a crucial part in the care of children with pediatric cataract. The
aim of this study was to explore and explain sense of coherence, family
self-efficacy, perceived social support, fatigue and parent reported experiences 
(PREM), in order to improve clinical care. Questionnaires were sent to the
parents of children registered in the Swedish national Paediatric Cataract
Register, PECARE, from 2006-2019 (n = 506). The response rate was 46% (n = 231), 
185 mothers and 44 fathers with a mean age of 40.39 years (SD ± 6.41 years). In
total, 38% of the parents reported severe fatigue, and mothers were more burdened
than fathers. Sense of coherence was strongly related to fatigue, especially
among parents of children with bilateral cataract. Mental fatigue and reduced
motivation explained 45% of the variation in sense of coherence. Being taken
seriously by the ophthalmological clinic explained over 60% of the variation in
satisfaction with care when controlled for parents' age and gender. In
conclusion, fatigue is important to take in consideration when interacting with
parents of children with cataract, especially those with bilateral cataract.
Being taken seriously is the key marker of satisfaction with care and support
from professionals. In addition to fatigue, the parents' age and life situation
affect how they perceive their own, as well as the professionals' effort, and
should be considered when tailoring family-centered care.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17176329 
PMCID: PMC7503903
PMID: 32878121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Einstein (Sao Paulo). 2020;18:eED5562. doi: 10.31744/einstein_journal/2020ed5562.
Epub 2020 Aug 26.

Religion as a protective factor for health.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Akerman M(1), Mendes R(2), Lima S(3), Guerra HL(4), Silva RAD(5), Sacardo DP(5), 
Fernandez JCA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Saúde Pública, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Santos, SP, Brazil.
(3)Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(4)Pontifícia Universidade Católica de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(5)Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas,
SP, Brazil.

DOI: 10.31744/einstein_journal/2020ed5562 
PMCID: PMC7444599
PMID: 32876088  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Chaos. 2020 Aug;30(8):083114. doi: 10.1063/5.0006304.

Predicting phase and sensing phase coherence in chaotic systems with machine
learning.

Zhang C(1), Jiang J(2), Qu SX(1), Lai YC(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Physics and Information Technology, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an
710062, China.
(2)School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering, Arizona State
University, Tempe, Arizona 85287, USA.

Erratum in
    Chaos. 2020 Aug;30(8):089901.

Recent interest in exploiting machine learning for model-free prediction of
chaotic systems focused on the time evolution of the dynamical variables of the
system as a whole, which include both amplitude and phase. In particular, in the 
framework based on reservoir computing, the prediction horizon as determined by
the largest Lyapunov exponent is often short, typically about five or six
Lyapunov times that contain approximately equal number of oscillation cycles of
the system. There are situations in the real world where the phase information is
important, such as the ups and downs of species populations in ecology, the
polarity of a voltage variable in an electronic circuit, and the concentration of
certain chemical above or below the average. Using classic chaotic oscillators
and a chaotic food-web system from ecology as examples, we demonstrate that
reservoir computing can be exploited for long-term prediction of the phase of
chaotic oscillators. The typical prediction horizon can be orders of magnitude
longer than that with predicting the entire variable, for which we provide a
physical understanding. We also demonstrate that a properly designed reservoir
computing machine can reliably sense phase synchronization between a pair of
coupled chaotic oscillators with implications to the design of the parallel
reservoir scheme for predicting large chaotic systems.

DOI: 10.1063/5.0006304 
PMID: 32872815 


284. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Aug 26;17(17). pii: E6189. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17176189.

Sense of Coherence Mediates the Links between Job Status Prior to Birth and
Postpartum Depression: A Structured Equation Modeling Approach.

Goren G(1), Sarid O(1), Philippou P(1), Taylor A(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Spitzer Department of Social Work, Ben Gurion University of the Negev,
Beer Sheva 84105, Israel.
(2)School of Psychology, Sport and Physical Activity, AECC University College,
Bournemouth BH5 2DF, UK.

Postpartum depression (PPD) has detrimental effects on the health of the mother, 
child and family. Socio-demographic variables can influence PPD. Sense of
coherence (SOC) is a personal resource that mitigates the experience of stressful
events. We hypothesized that SOC would have a protective effect against PPD over 
time. The aim was to investigate the effects of socio-demographic factors and SOC
on PPD at birth (T1) and nine months postpartum (T2). A longitudinal study of
primiparous women (n = 114; age range 18-47 years) measured PPD, SOC and
socio-demographics at T1 and T2. The majority were married, had no economic
difficulties and were employed before birth. Results showed that PPD at T1
(15.8%) declined to 6.2% (T2). Job status was positively associated with SOC at
T1. The structured equation model accounted for 27% of the variance in PPD (T2). 
In the first pathway, job status was linked to PPD (T2) via SOC at T1 and T2. In 
the second, SOC and PPD (T1) and SOC (T2) mediated the link between job status
and PPD (T2). Results and clinical implications are discussed in the context of
the theory of conservation of resources. An intervention for enhancing SOC is
recommended for woman at risk of PPD.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17176189 
PMCID: PMC7504177
PMID: 32858960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Aug 26;17(17). pii: E6184. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17176184.

Buffering PTSD in Canine Search and Rescue Teams? Associations with Resilience,
Sense of Coherence, and Societal Acknowledgment.

Kaufmann M(1), Gelb M(2), Augsburger M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Psychopathology and Clinical Intervention, University of Zurich,
8050 Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)TCRH Training Center Rescue and Help Mosbach, 74821 Mosbach, Germany.

Rescue workers present an elevated risk for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 
and recently, research has begun to focus on coping styles and social support as 
protective factors in this population. Associations in the particular group of
search and rescue dog handlers still lack evidence. The aim of the study is to
investigate if functional cognitions and social support also decrease the risk
for PTSD. Active voluntary rescue dog handlers (n = 116) rated levels of
resilience, sense of coherence, and social acknowledgment (SAQ; subscales general
disapproval, familial disapproval, recognition), in addition to a trauma
checklist and PTSD symptoms. Linear regression analyses and two different graph
models were calculated to explore associations, as well as potential pathways.
Controlling for trauma exposure, the SAQ general disapproval emerged as the only 
significant predictor in the regression model. In the graph models, SAQ familial 
disapproval was linked to SAQ recognition and SAQ general disapproval. The
latter, together with a sense of coherence manageability, affected PTSD
re-experiencing symptoms through resilience. The findings are in line with
earlier work. The study underlines the importance of targeting resilience and
manageability, as well as enhancing social support in prevention programs for
PTSD in canine search and rescue teams. Future research is warranted to further
investigate model stability and replicate findings.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17176184 
PMCID: PMC7503916
PMID: 32858916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Front Public Health. 2020 Jul 28;8:285. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2020.00285.
eCollection 2020.

Effects of the "Inspirational Lecture" in Combination With "Ordinary Antenatal
Parental Classes" as Professional Support for Expectant Parents: A Pilot Study as
a Randomized Controlled Trial.

Thorstensson S(1), Ekström-Bergström A(2), Bäckström C(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, University of Skövde, Skövde, Sweden.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, University West, Trollhättan, Sweden.

Background: Both expectant mothers and their partners describe weaknesses in
ordinary parental preparatory professional support provided internationally and
nationally within Sweden. Therefore, it is necessary to develop the parental
preparatory professional support provided by midwives for expectant parents
within Sweden. This study will evaluate the effects on expectant parents of
receiving a combination of an "inspirational lecture" and "ordinary antenatal
parental classes" compared with only "ordinary antenatal parental classes."
Methods/Design: This block randomized controlled trial included an intervention
as a pilot study, in which expectant parents were randomized for (1) the
inspirational lecture and ordinary antenatal parental classes (intervention group
[IG]) (n = 66) or (2) ordinary antenatal parental classes (control group [CG]) (n
= 60). Data collection with repeated questionnaires was conducted in the first
week and 6 months after birth. Statistical analyses were conducted for
participant characteristics, differences between parents within IG and CG,
effects of the intervention, intention to treat, and internal consistency of the 
included measurements. Results: The intervention showed a tendency to be gainful 
for one out of four outcomes related to birth experience, and parents' perceived 
quality of parental couple relationship consensus and sexuality and
manageability. These results were more prominent for the partners. Parents within
both the intervention and control groups reported decreased social support in the
first 6 months after birth. Conclusion and Clinical Implications: Overall, the
concept of the inspirational lecture in combination with ordinary antenatal
parental classes as parental preparatory professional support seems to be a
valuable care intervention. However, this study was a pilot study and the results
should therefore be interpreted with caution. More research is needed since
childbirth and transition to parenthood are complex processes in need of
comprehension.

Copyright © 2020 Thorstensson, Ekström-Bergström and Bäckström.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2020.00285 
PMCID: PMC7399156
PMID: 32850567  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Transcult Psychiatry. 2021 Feb;58(1):38-51. doi: 10.1177/1363461520941386. Epub
2020 Aug 26.

Rethinking sense of coherence: Perceptions of comprehensibility, manageability,
and meaningfulness in a group of Palestinian health care providers operating in
the West Bank and Israel.

Veronese G(1), Dhaouadi Y(2), Afana A(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Milano-Bicocca, Stellenbosch University.
(2)University of Milano-Bicocca.
(3)McGill University.

Drawing on a salutogenic perspective, we explored sense of coherence (SOC) in a
group of Palestinian mental health care providers living and working in Israel
and the occupied Palestinian territories (West Bank). Specifically, we conducted 
a qualitative exploration of the cultural characteristics of SOC and its
components (comprehensibility, manageability, and meaningfulness) in two groups
of Palestinian Muslim helpers. We found that context-specific features of SOC can
mobilize generalized resistance resources for coping with traumatic and stressful
experiences, even in an environment characterized by political instability,
military violence, and social trauma. Ten main themes emerged from the thematic
content analysis: acceptance, reacting to adversity, acknowledging human
insecurity (comprehensibility), self-control, talking to family, education as a
resource for survival, connecting to the severity of the event, responsibility as
a source of control (manageability), religiosity, and sense of belonging
(meaningfulness). The Islamic faith, as expressed through the concepts of Sumud
and Taslim, seemed to permeate individuals' ability to attribute meaning to
historical and transgenerational trauma, as well as to their ongoing traumatic
conditions, thus acting as their ultimate source of health and wellbeing. A
holistic, spiritual, and collectivist outlook helped respondents to approach
their lives with optimism. We discuss the implications for mental health care
providers and future research directions.

DOI: 10.1177/1363461520941386 
PMID: 32847440 


288. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2020 Aug 6;54(8):844-848. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn112150-20200602-00806.

[Moderating effect of sense of coherence between occupational stress and
depression].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Chen H(1), Ye B(1), Wang L(1), Wei YX(1), Dai JM(1), Gao JL(1), Wang F(2), Fu
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, School of Public Health, Fudan University, 
Shanghai 200032, China.
(2)Department of Political Science, School of Humanities and Social Sciences,
Huadong Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China.

Objective: To explore the moderating effect of sense of coherence in the
relationship between occupational stress and depression. Methods: From June to
September in 2018, migrant workers were purposively selected from the urban
(including office buildings, shopping malls, barber shops or restaurants and
other service enterprises) and suburban (including microelectronics, internet,
clothing processing and art design and other factories) areas of Shanghai. A
total of 3 034 people were investigated and 2 573 valid questionnaires were
collected. Patient health questionnaire (PHQ), sense of coherence questionnaire
(SOC) and job content questionnaire (JCQ) were used to investigate the levels
depression, sense of coherence and occupational stress. Hierarchical regression
analysis was used to analyze the moderating effect of sense of coherence on
occupational stress and depression, and SPSS PROCESS macro program and Bootstrap 
method were used to further explore the moderating effect of sense of coherence. 
Results: The age of total 2 573 migrant workers was (28.24±7.33) years old and
49.79% of them were males. The scores of depression, occupational stress and
sense of coherence were 6.67±4.74, 28.45±4.38 and 62.02±10.89, respectively. The 
depression level was positively correlated with occupational stress (r=0.33,
P=0.007), and negatively correlated with sense of coherence (r=-0.53, P=0.003).
The hierarchy regression analysis suggested that the interaction between
occupational stress and sense of coherence was associated with depression symptom
(β=-0.07, P=0.001). Bootstrap analysis showed that occupational stress was not
associated with depression symptom with high level of sense of sense of coherence
(β=0.04, 95%CI=-0.01-0.10), while occupational stress was associated with
depression symptom with low level of sense of sense of coherence (β=0.19,
95%CI=0.14-0.23). Conclusion: The high level of sense of coherence has a
moderating effect on the relationship between occupational stress and depressive 
symptoms, while the low level of sense of coherence does not have this effect.

Publisher: 目的： 探讨心理一致感在职业紧张与抑郁间的调节效应。 方法：
于2018年6—9月，采用立意抽样的方式，在上海市主城区（以写字楼、商场、理发店或饭店等服务企业为主）和郊区企业（类型涉及微电子、互联网、服装加工及艺术设计等工厂
）抽取非上海户籍流动工人为研究对象进行问卷调查，收集研究对象的人口学特征。共调查了3 034名研究对象，回收有效问卷2
573份。采用患者健康量表（PHQ）、心理一致感量表（SOC）和工作内容问卷（JCQ）对抑郁、心理一致感和职业紧张水平进行评定。采用层次回归分析初步分析心理一致感
在职业紧张与抑郁间的调节效应关系，并探讨心理一致感的调节效应。 结果： 2 573名研究对象年龄为（28.24±7.33）岁，男性1 281名（49.79
%），抑郁、职业紧张和心理一致感得分分别为6.67±4.74、28.45±4.38和62.02±10.89。抑郁水平与职业紧张正相关（r=0.33,
P=0.007），与心理一致感负相关（r=-0.53, P=0.003）。层次回归分析显示，职业紧张与心理一致感的交互作用与抑郁症有关（β=-0.07,
P=0.001）；Bootstrap分析显示，当心理一致感水平较高时，抑郁症状和职业紧张关联无统计学意义（β=0.04，95%CI=-0.01~0.10），在心理
一致感水平较低时，二者关联有统计学意义（β=0.19，95%CI=0.14~0.23）。 结论：
高水平心理一致感在职业紧张与抑郁间具有调节效应，低水平的心理一致感不具有该效应。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112150-20200602-00806 
PMID: 32842313  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Fam Community Health. 2021 Jul-Sep 01;44(3):225-234. doi:
10.1097/FCH.0000000000000277.

Association Between Sense of Coherence and Periodontal Outcomes: A Systematic
Review and Meta-analysis.

Cruz Olivo EA(1), Corradi-Dias L, Paiva SM, Storino RJ, Moura MF, Pereira AG,
Cota LOM, Costa FO, Abreu LG.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Periodontology (Messrs Cruz Olivo, Storino, and Pereira, Ms
Moura, and Drs Miranda Cota and Costa) and Child's and Adolescent's Oral Health
(Ms Corradi-Dias and Drs Paiva and Abreu), Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, 
Belo Horizonte, Brazil; and Department of Population & Patient Health, King's
College London, United Kingdom (Dr Abreu).

This systematic review and meta-analysis aimed to evaluate the association
between sense of coherence (SOC) and periodontal outcomes. Electronic searches
were performed in 6 databases. Seventeen studies that evaluated the association
between SOC and periodontal outcomes were included. The included studies
demonstrated that individuals with a stronger SOC were more likely to present
improved periodontal outcomes. The meta-analysis showed that individuals with a
lower SOC were 3.31 times more likely to present bleeding on probing.
Sons/daughters of mothers with a lower SOC were 3.22 times more likely to present
gingival bleeding. Individuals with a stronger SOC have better periodontal
health.

Copyright © 2020 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/FCH.0000000000000277 
PMID: 32842003 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


290. Health Place. 2020 Jul;64:102365. doi: 10.1016/j.healthplace.2020.102365. Epub
2020 Jul 1.

Examining the relationship between urban liveability and gender-based violence: A
systematic review.

Alderton A(1), Henry N(2), Foster S(3), Badland H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Urban Research, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia. Electronic
address: amanda.alderton@rmit.edu.au.
(2)Social and Global Studies Centre, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Centre for Urban Research, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia; School of
Agriculture and Environment, University of Western Australia, Crawley, Australia.
(4)Centre for Urban Research, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia.

Gender-based violence can include, but is not limited to, domestic violence,
intimate partner violence, rape, and intimate partner homicide. It is
well-established that gender inequality is the main driver of gender-based
violence. However, little work has attempted to unpack how gender-based violence 
perpetuates within the neighbourhood context, and whether 'liveability'
attributes might intersect with gender inequality and violence. We systematically
reviewed quantitative evidence examining associations between gender-based
violence and several liveability neighbourhood-level factors. MEDLINE (Ovid) and 
Scopus databases yielded 1822 potentially relevant articles. 50 articles met
inclusion criteria. Neighbourhood social capital was most consistently associated
with reduced gender-based violence. Few studies examined built environment
attributes (e.g. gambling venue densities, access to services). Future research
is needed to more deeply examine how combinations of salutogenic or pathogenic
neighbourhood attributes may reinforce or prevent violence.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.healthplace.2020.102365 
PMID: 32838891 


291. J Bodyw Mov Ther. 2020 Jul;24(3):212-220. doi: 10.1016/j.jbmt.2020.03.006. Epub
2020 Mar 15.

Perspectives on tissue adaptation related to allostatic load: Scoping review and 
integrative hypothesis with a focus on osteopathic palpation.

Lunghi C(1), Consorti G(2), Tramontano M(3), Esteves JE(4), Cerritelli F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical-based Human Research Department, Research Division, Foundation COME
Collaboration, Pescara, Italy; Malta I.C.O.M. Educational, Malta. Electronic
address: christianlunghi@gmail.com.
(2)Clinical-based Human Research Department, Research Division, Foundation COME
Collaboration, Pescara, Italy; Research Department of the Centre pour l'Etude, la
Recherche et la Diffusion Osteopathiques (C.E.R.D.O.), Rome, Italy.
(3)Fondazione Santa Lucia IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(4)Clinical-based Human Research Department, Research Division, Foundation COME
Collaboration, Pescara, Italy; University College of Osteopathy, London, UK; Gulf
National Centre, Foundation COME Collaboration, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; MYO
Osteopathy, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Clinical-based Human Research Department, Research Division, Foundation COME
Collaboration, Pescara, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Osteopathic care may support an individual's adaptive capacity,
including allostatic regulation and tissue changes in both health and disease.
The palpatory findings which osteopaths claim are related to tissue changes may
be linked to allostatic load. However, this putative link has not been formally
investigated.
METHODS: We conducted a scoping review to critically appraise the relevant
literature on the relationship between allostatic processes and tissue
alterations. This review evaluates the use and relevance of palpatory findings in
osteopathic care. We searched on PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane library for research
exploring the links between tissue adaptation, allostasis and osteopathic
palpatory findings (OPF).
RESULTS: Recent studies provide insights into the role of allostatic regulation
on body systems' responses related to tissue alterations. These results provide
new insights into the relevance of OPF to clinical practice.
DISCUSSION: We build upon the findings of our review to propose a putative model 
for OPF in clinical practice.
CONCLUSION: Although the clinical phenomena associated with OPF may be
biologically plausible, it lacks the necessary underpinning research evidence.
Arguably, the classical focus on the diagnosis of palpable tissue changes fails
to integrate biological, social and neuropsychological aspects such as stress
responses. Tissue alterations related to stress and allostatic load markers have 
been less studied. Tissue changes involved in the adaptive process may be useful 
to practitioners in the field of manual therapy, particularly in osteopathy. We
propose that OPF are one of the multidimensional aspects that may inform
osteopathic decision-making. However, they should be considered within a
biopsychosocial perspective and taking into account concepts of allostatic load
and regulation.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbmt.2020.03.006 
PMID: 32825991 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Each author of 
the present review declared no conflict of interests.


292. Children (Basel). 2020 Aug 21;7(9). pii: E108. doi: 10.3390/children7090108.

Factors Influencing Sense of Coherence: Family Relationships, High School Life
and Autism Spectrum Tendency.

Omiya T(1), Deguchi N(1), Togari T(2), Yamazaki Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Nursing, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba
305-8575, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Liberal Arts, the Open University of Japan, Chiba 261-8586, Japan.
(3)Department of Social Welfare, Faculty of Social Welfare, Nihon Fukushi
University, Chita-Gun 470-3295, Japan.

Adolescence is marked by significant life stress. Recently, school refusal and
dropouts as well as suicide among Japanese adolescents have increased. Sense of
coherence (SOC) is recognized as a competency that helps people deal with stress.
The purpose of this study was to examine the factors influencing SOC in male and 
female high school students. We conducted a survey with 203 pairs of high school 
students and their mothers, in Tokyo, to explore their SOC, family relationships,
school belonging, and autistic traits. Analysis of the data revealed a weak
relationship between female students' SOC and that of their mothers, and no
relationship between male students' SOC and their mothers' SOC. Feelings of
acceptance and recognition from teachers improved students' SOC, irrespective of 
gender. Low SOC in mothers had a negative impact on female students' SOC, and
children's lack of imagination (an autism spectrum tendency) had a negative
impact on male students' SOC. This study revealed the importance of support at
home and school according to the needs of both genders.

DOI: 10.3390/children7090108 
PMCID: PMC7552669
PMID: 32825759 


293. Psychother Psychosom. 2020;89(6):386-392. doi: 10.1159/000510752. Epub 2020 Aug
18.

Impact of COVID-19 on Public Mental Health and the Buffering Effect of a Sense of
Coherence.

Schäfer SK(1), Sopp MR(1), Schanz CG(1), Staginnus M(2), Göritz AS(3), Michael
T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Saarland University, Saarbruecken,
Germany.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Occupational and Consumer Psychology, Freiburg University,
Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Saarland University, Saarbruecken,
Germany, t.michael@mx.uni-saarland.de.

INTRODUCTION: It is claimed that the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic
has had a negative impact on mental health. However, to date, prospective studies
are lacking. Moreover, it is important to identify which factors modulate the
stress response to the pandemic. Previously, sense of coherence (SOC) has emerged
as a particularly important resistance factor.
OBJECTIVE: This prospective study aimed to assess the impact of the COVID-19
outbreak on mental health and to investigate the ability of pre-outbreak SOC
levels to predict changes in psychopathological symptoms.
METHODS: This study assessed psychopathological symptoms and SOC before and after
the COVID-19 outbreak as well as post-outbreak COVID-19-related traumatic
distress in a German-speaking sample (n =1,591). Bivariate latent change score
(BLCS) modeling was used to analyze pre- to post-outbreak changes in
psychopathological symptoms and the ability of SOC to predict symptom changes.
RESULTS: Overall, there was no change in psychopathological symptoms. However, on
an individual-respondent level, 10% experienced a clinically significant increase
in psychopathological symptoms and 15% met cut-off criteria for COVID-19-related 
traumatic distress. Using BLCS modeling, we identified a high-stress group
experiencing an increase in psychopathological symptoms and a decrease in SOC and
a low-stress group showing the reversed pattern. Changes in SOC and
psychopathological symptoms were predicted by pre-outbreak SOC and
psychopathological symptom levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Although mental health was stable in most respondents, a small group
of respondents characterized by low levels of SOC experienced increased
psychopathological symptoms from pre- to post-outbreak. Thus, SOC training might 
be a promising approach to enhance the resistance to stressors.

© 2020 The Author(s)Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000510752 
PMCID: PMC7490493
PMID: 32810855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Disabil Rehabil. 2020 Aug 17:1-9. doi: 10.1080/09638288.2020.1804628. [Epub ahead
of print]

"I was worried about not being good enough". Experiences and perspectives on
pregnancy, childbirth and parenthood when living with a neuromuscular disorder - 
an exploration of everyday life challenges.

Handberg C(1)(2), Myrup P(1), Højberg AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Rehabilitation Center for Neuromuscular Diseases, Aarhus, Denmark.
(2)Department of Public Health, Faculty of Health, Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to explore the everyday life experiences and
perspectives on challenges related to pregnancy, childbirth and parenthood when
living with neuromuscular disorders (NMDs) and identify important elements to
take into consideration for parents and their health professionals.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In all, 27 people (17 with a NMD and 10 partners without a
NMD) were included in this study. The participants were all parents or expecting 
parents. Both mothers and fathers and ambulant and non-ambulant participants were
included to broaden the perspective. Three types of semi-structured interviews
were applied. The analysis was guided by the Interpretive Description methodology
and Antonovsky's Sense of Coherence theory.
RESULTS: The findings illuminated insights to ongoing challenges in the everyday 
lives of parents with NMD. Enforced Dilemmas represented guilt and dilemmas on
the possibility of passing on the NMD. Reflections on Bodily Ability symbolized
the effect that pregnancy and parenthood had on the body. Concept of Normality
signified the concerns the parents had about "not being normal enough."
Experience of Dependency addressed being dependent on others and No One to
Emulate how the rarity of the NMD made it difficult to find peers or seek advice.
CONCLUSION: The study emphasizes the importance of the professionals providing
counseling and support on pregnancy, childbirth, and parenthood either during
consultations, online or in structured professional and peer-support
rehabilitation groups for expecting parents or for new parents with a
NMD.IMPLICATIONS FOR REHABILITATIONProfessionals must provide knowledge and
counselling on pregnancy, childbirth, and parenthood to support families with NMD
who are expecting a child or have already become parents and address the illusion
of normal.Professional centralized and specialized units where people with NMD
can get advice on pregnancy and give birth should be an option.Structured
professional and peer-support rehabilitation groups (physical meetings or online)
on pregnancy, childbirth, and parenthood may be of value for the parents due to
the rarity of the diagnosis.Online information and knowledge on pregnancy,
childbirth, and parenthood and NMD should be widely available.Health
professionals and peers can help ensure and support an experience of
comprehensibility, manageability, and meaningfulness among the parents with NMD
and develop rehabilitation services that meet the needs and preferences of people
considering getting a child or who are already parents with NMDs or other
disabilities.

DOI: 10.1080/09638288.2020.1804628 
PMID: 32805149 


295. BMC Palliat Care. 2020 Aug 16;19(1):124. doi: 10.1186/s12904-020-00632-y.

Experiences of participation in bereavement groups from significant others'
perspectives; a qualitative study.

Näppä U(1), Björkman-Randström K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Mid Sweden University, S-831 25, Östersund, Sweden.
ulla.nappa@miun.se.
(2)Department of Nursing, Mid Sweden University, S-831 25, Östersund, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: When death ends a life, the impact of caring for person who suffered 
a period of illness or disease continues for significant others who are left to
grieve. They should be offered support to avoid complicated grief. This can be
provided in different ways and individually or in groups. This study aims to
describe significant others' experiences of participation in bereavement groups.
METHODS: Ten bereavement groups that each met five times offered support for the 
significant others of deceased loved ones who had been cared for by a
palliative-care team. After the five meetings, the grieving members (n = 46)
completed written comments about the role of the groups; they also commented one 
year after participating (n = 39). Comments were analyzed with qualitative
content analysis with a directed approach using the theory of a good death
according to the 6S's: self-image, self-determination, social relationships,
symptom control, synthesis and summation, and surrender.
RESULTS: Bereavement groups were found to be a source for alleviating grief for
some significant others, but not all experienced relief. Moreover, grief was
found to persist during participation. Another finding involved the impact of the
role of the palliative home-care team on bereavement support. To evaluate the
experience of participating in a bereavement group, the use the 6S's as a model
was a strength of the analysis. Bereavement groups could enhance the self and
offer relief from grief. Participation was described as social relationships that
offered a sense of coherence and understanding in grief. The effects of
participation were more meaningful close to the loss and could lose efficacy over
time. Bereavement support provided before a loved one's death was seen as
valuable.
CONCLUSION: Overall, the bereavement groups eased the grief of significant others
close to the death of their loved one. However, moving forward, several of the
significant others were not sure that their participation eased their grief. To
identify persons who may remain in a state of complicated grief, a routine of
planned contacts with the bereaved should begin before death and be followed up
later than six months after the death of a loved one.

DOI: 10.1186/s12904-020-00632-y 
PMCID: PMC7429679
PMID: 32799845  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Aug 11;17(16). pii: E5819. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17165819.

Implementing Mental Health Promotion Initiatives-Process Evaluation of the ABCs
of Mental Health in Denmark.

Hinrichsen C(1), Koushede VJ(2), Madsen KR(1), Nielsen L(1), Ahlmark NG(1),
Santini ZI(1), Meilstrup C(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Danish National Institute of Public Health, University of Southern
Denmark, Studiestraede 6, 1455 Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Copenhagen, Oester Farimagsgade 2A,
1353 Copenhagen, Denmark.

Treatment and prevention alone are unlikely to make a significant difference in
reducing the burden of poor mental health and mental illness. Therefore, mental
health promotion (MHP) initiatives are advocated. In 2014, the ABCs of mental
health (ABCs) partnership was established in Denmark; in the partnership, partner
organisations, e.g., municipalities and NGOs, use a research-based framework for 
MHP, the ABC-framework, to develop and implement MHP initiatives. This paper has 
two aims: (1) to outline the overall characteristics of these MHP initiatives;
and (2) to explore local coordinator and stakeholder perceptions of the
implementation processes and the impact of the MHP initiatives. Questionnaire
surveys, individual interviews and group interviews were conducted during
2017-2020. The MHP initiatives were grouped according to three strategies:
building MHP capacity, campaign activities to promote mental health awareness and
knowledge and establishing and promoting opportunities to engage in mentally
healthy activities. The ABC-framework was positively received and viewed as
providing relevant knowledge for working with MHP as well as fostering
intersectoral and interprofessional collaborations. However, using a bottom-up
approach to develop and implement MHP initiatives can be time-consuming and
resource demanding, and it requires a deliberate balancing of local adaptability 
and concrete guidance when engaging stakeholders and implementers. Overall, using
the ABC-framework to develop and implement MHP initiatives holds great promise
for advancing and promoting MHP practice.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17165819 
PMCID: PMC7460269
PMID: 32796754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Aug 10;17(16). pii: E5791. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17165791.

Physical Activity, Physical Fitness and the Sense of Coherence-Their Role in Body
Acceptance among Polish Adolescents.

Laudańska-Krzemińska I(1), Krzysztoszek J(2), Naczk M(3), Gajewska E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Activity and Health Promotion Science, Poznan
University of Physical Education, 61-871 Poznan, Poland.
(2)Department of Didactics of Physical Activity, Poznan University of Physical
Education, 61-871 Poznan, Poland.
(3)Institute of Health Sciences, Collegium Medicum, University of Zielona Gora,
65-417 Zielona Gora, Poland.
(4)Department of Developmental Neurology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 
60-355 Poznan, Poland.

The aim of the study was to investigate the protective role of physical activity 
(PA) and other health-related bio-psycho components (physical fitness, body
composition, body perception and the sense of coherence (SOC)) in body
acceptance. We searched for gender differences in those relationships. We
investigated 231 adolescents aged 13-16 years from an urban area in Poland. We
conducted objective measurements of height, weight, fat% and relative value of
minute oxygen consumption. Questionnaires for PA, SOC Body Figure Perception and 
body acceptance were applied. Linear regression was used for analyzing
determinants of body acceptance. We found that more physically active girls
reported a less slim ideal vision of their figure (p < 0.05). Physical fitness is
a better predictor of body acceptance than physical activity. In the final model,
the sense of coherence, body mass index (BMI), and gender (being a boy) were also
predictors of body acceptance (F(6,92) = 13.084, p < 0.0001). Gender differences 
were discussed in the present study. Fitness enhancing physical activity should
be recommended for adolescents to achieve the protective psychosocial effect
especially among girls. Physical activity on a daily basis brings positive
results in a more adequate and reasonable body assessment and it can play a
protective role in terms of mental wellbeing. Body satisfaction varies between
genders and it is a more sensitive issue among girls than boys during
adolescence.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17165791 
PMCID: PMC7460119
PMID: 32785143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Psychosom Res. 2020 Jul 29;137:110205. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2020.110205.
[Epub ahead of print]

Predictors of posttraumatic stress following transient ischemic attack: An
observational cohort study.

Grosse-Holz VM(1), Nikendei C(2), Andermann M(3), Ringleb PA(3), Friederich
HC(1), Rizos T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Internal Medicine and Psychosomatics, University of
Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Department of General Internal Medicine and Psychosomatics, University of
Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
christoph.nikendei@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of Heidelberg, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Transient ischemic attack (TIA) has been reported to be frequently
followed by symptoms of post-TIA posttraumatic stress disorder (post-TIA PTSD).
Risk factors for post-TIA PTSD remain largely unknown. We aimed to identify
predictors of post-TIA PTSD development to enable post-TIA PTSD risk assessment
and inform future development of treatment and prevention interventions.
METHOD: TIA patients were examined twice for this observational cohort study.
Symptoms of post-TIA PTSD, depression and anxiety were assessed shortly after TIA
during in-hospital stay (T1) and three months after TIA (T2). The impact of known
general PTSD risk factors (psychiatric history, peritraumatic dissociation,
social support), psychological resilience factors (sense of coherence,
mindfulness, attachment style) and TIA characteristics (affected circulatory
territory, symptom type and duration) at T1 on post-TIA PTSD symptom severity at 
T2 was tested using hierarchical multiple linear regression.
RESULTS: Sixty-one patients (83.6%) completed the study at T2. Fifteen patients
(24.6%) were classified as post-TIA PTSD⊕ at T2. In multiple linear regression
analysis, age, sex, psychiatric history, peritraumatic dissociation and social
support together explained 39.9% of variance of post-TIA posttraumatic stress
symptom severity. Sense of coherence and mindfulness explained further 17.8% of
variance. Clinical TIA characteristics were not associated with post-TIA PTSD.
CONCLUSIONS: Post-TIA PTSD is a common phenomenon. General PTSD risk factors can 
be applied for post-TIA PTSD risk assessment. Sense of coherence and mindfulness 
are promising target variables for post-TIA PTSD treatment and prevention
interventions.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2020.110205 
PMID: 32768689 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest TR received
consulting honoraria, speakers' honoraria and travel support from BMS Pfizer,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Bayer HealthCare and Daiichi Sankyo, outside the submitted 
work. PR received consulting honoraria, speakers' honoraria and travel support
from Bayer Health Care, BMS, Boehringer Ingelheim, Daiichi Sankyo, and Pfizer
outside the submitted work. For the remaining authors none were declared.


299. PLoS One. 2020 Aug 5;15(8):e0236722. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0236722.
eCollection 2020.

Understanding childbirth as a complex salutogenic phenomenon: The EU COST BIRTH
Action Special Collection.

Downe S(1), Calleja Agius J(2), Balaam MC(1), Frith L(3).

Author information: 
(1)ReaCH Group, UCLan, Lancashire, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, University of Malta,
Msida, Malta.
(3)Institute of Population Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United
Kingdom.

In 2014, the EU funded a four-year European Cooperation in Science and Technology
(COST) Action to address the topic of childbirth. The COST Birth Action was a
cross-European network, that brought together over 120 scientists, practitioners,
activists and policy makers from 34 countries to work on intrapartum care. The
central aim was to advance the state of research and practice in a specific area 
of great clinical and social importance, intrapartum care. The Action used inter 
and trans-disciplinary approaches to address birth from multiple perspectives and
drew on complexity theory and the concept of salutogenesis (wellbeing). This
special collection presents six papers produced from the Action and gives a sense
of the range and depth of the work conducted. The Collection illustrates the
knowledge that can be generated when a diverse group of people come together with
a similar goals and perspectives.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0236722 
PMCID: PMC7406045
PMID: 32756586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


300. J Adv Nurs. 2020 Oct;76(10):2737-2746. doi: 10.1111/jan.14470. Epub 2020 Aug 3.

Effects of strength-based intervention on health outcomes of family caregivers of
persons with dementia: A study protocol.

S F Yu D(1), Cheng ST(2), Chow EO(3), Kwok T(4), Mccormack B(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong.
(2)Department of Health and Physical Education, The Education University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(3)Department of Social and Behavioural Sciences, The City University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, UK.
(4)Department of Medicine & Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(5)Division of Nursing, Occupational Therapy & Arts Therapies, Queen Margaret
University, Edinburgh, UK.

AIMS: This study aims at identifying the health effects of a strength-based
intervention on family caregivers of persons with dementia and to explore the
underlying mechanism. The perception of family caregivers on the strength-based
intervention will also be explored.
DESIGN: This sequential mixed-method study comprises a double-blind randomized
controlled trial and a descriptive qualitative study.
METHODS: A group of 372 family caregivers of persons with dementia will be
recruited from community settings. They will be randomized to receive the
strength-based intervention or a dementia education program. Based on
Antonovksy's theory of salutogenesis, the strength-based intervention integrates 
skills of narrative therapy and empowerment strategies. It comprises 14 weekly
group-based sessions and two bi-weekly follow-up telephone calls. The education
program serves as the control intervention. Validated instruments are used to
measure sense of coherence, coping, caregiver burden, and health-related quality 
of life at baseline, 14 weeks, and 22 weeks. Mixed-effects models and path
analysis will be used to identify the treatment effect and the mediating
mechanism. A subsample of 30 caregivers who report differential changes in the
health outcome will be engaged in qualitative interviews. The study was funded in
2017.
DISCUSSION: This study marks the first attempt to adopt a theory-driven
strength-based approach to improve the health outcomes of family caregivers of
persons with dementia. The stringent and comprehensive evaluation will inform its
effects and the underlying mechanism.
IMPACT: This study will have important theoretical and public health
implications. Theoretically, the study will enhance understanding of Antonovsky's
theory of salutogenesis by examining the modifiability of sense of coherence and 
the way it enhances health-related outcomes. In terms of public health
implications, the strength-based intervention focusing on optimizing the inner
strength can provide a new paradigm to promote the adjustment of family
caregivers of persons with dementia.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This project was registered in the Clinical Trials Registry
of the Centre for Clinical Research and Biostatistics (registration number:
CUHK_CCRB00551; date registered: 6 April 2017).

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jan.14470 
PMID: 32743919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


301. BMJ Open. 2020 Jul 31;10(7):e039832. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-039832.

Distress and resilience of healthcare professionals during the COVID-19 pandemic 
(DARVID): study protocol for a mixed-methods research project.

Fuchs A(1), Abegglen S(2), Berger-Estilita J(3), Greif R(3)(4), Eigenmann H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Inselspital, University
Hospital Bern, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland alexander.fuchs@insel.ch.
(2)Department of Health Psychology and Behavioural Medicine, University of Bern, 
Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Anaesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Inselspital, University
Hospital Bern, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(4)School of Medicine, Sigmund Freud Private University Vienna, Wien, Austria.

INTRODUCTION: The unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic has exposed healthcare
professionals (HCPs) to exceptional situations that can lead to increased anxiety
(ie, infection anxiety and perceived vulnerability), traumatic stress and
depression. We will investigate the development of these psychological
disturbances in HCPs at the treatment front line and second line during the
COVID-19 pandemic over a 12-month period in different countries. Additionally, we
will explore whether personal resilience factors and a work-related sense of
coherence influence the development of mental health problems in HCPs.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: We plan to carry out a sequential qualitative-quantitative 
mixed-methods design study. The quantitative phase consists of a longitudinal
online survey based on six validated questionnaires, to be completed at three
points in time. A qualitative analysis will follow at the end of the pandemic to 
comprise at least nine semistructured interviews. The a priori sample size for
the survey will be a minimum of 160 participants, which we will extend to 400, to
compensate for dropout. Recruitment into the study will be through personal
invitations and the 'snowballing' sampling technique. Hierarchical linear
regression combined with qualitative data analysis, will facilitate greater
understanding of any associations between resilience and mental health issues in 
HCPs during pandemics.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The study participants will provide electronic informed
consent. All recorded data will be stored on a secured research server at the
study site, which will only be accessible to the investigators. The Bern Cantonal
Ethics Committee has waiv ed the need for ethical approval (Req-2020-00355, 1
April 2020). There are no ethical, legal or security issues regarding the data
collection, processing, storage and dissemination in this project.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ISRCTN13694948.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-039832 
PMCID: PMC7397979
PMID: 32737101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


302. Front Psychiatry. 2020 Jul 8;11:611. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00611. eCollection
2020.

To Increase Mental Health Literacy and Human Rights Among New-Coming,
Low-Educated Mothers With Experience of War: A Culturally, Tailor-Made Group
Health Promotion Intervention With Participatory Methodology Addressing
Indirectly the Children.

Ekblad S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics, Cultural Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Due to the increasing numbers of newcomers with impacts of war, civil war and
persecution, at high risk of trauma-related mental health problems, there is a
need for increase the poor mental health literacy (MHL) and human rights among
the new-comers, especially low-educated mothers with children. This article aimed
to present a case study report of several years' experience of tailor-made group 
health promotion intervention. It describes as an example, a project during
autumn 2018 in five municipalities of Sweden and in collaboration between
academia, primary care, social welfare, police, and an NGO. Fifty-one women,
Arabic- or Somalian speaking, with 1-7 children, mean age 40 years, low-educated 
and in average four years' of living in Sweden participated. Under supervision, a
local female member of the NGO coordinated the group meetings in Swedish with up 
to ten participants and the moderators were representatives of healthcare, social
services and police/lawyer, with an interpreter present. Each intervention
focused on human rights, health including mental health, psychosocial and
parenting support, by using a 5-week group intervention a 2 h/week, totally 10 h 
excluding pre- and post-evaluation, and one language per intervention. Each
meeting included 1-h lecture and after a short break with refreshments, the
participants asked questions to the respective moderator. It was a mixed method
but emphasis on qualitative design and participatory methodology with co-creation
and evaluation of the intervention. The results showed that this tailor-made
group intervention gave the participants empowerment and a sense of coherence,
MHL and tools to deal with stress/anxiety, based on their needs that were mapped 
before in a pilot study during Spring 2018, indirectly addressing their children.
However, they did not primarily talk about mental illness experience. It is vital
that these interventions toward the target group with limited exposure to Western
concepts (e.g., illness, anxiety, and trauma), may bridge the gap between Western
and traditional cultural understanding of pre- and postmigration stress. In
conclusion, MHL may be a function of both the cultural origin of the target
group's background and their resettlement in a Western reception country.
Implications are discussed.

Copyright © 2020 Ekblad.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00611 
PMCID: PMC7362953
PMID: 32733291 


303. Vaccine. 2020 Sep 11;38(40):6327-6333. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2020.07.034. Epub
2020 Jul 27.

Beliefs about causes of autism and vaccine hesitancy among parents of children
with autism spectrum disorder.

Goin-Kochel RP(1), Fombonne E(2), Mire SS(3), Minard CG(4), Sahni LC(5),
Cunningham RM(5), Boom JA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, United States; Autism
Center, Texas Children's Hospital, 8080 N. Stadium Drive, Suite 100, Houston, TX 
77054, United States. Electronic address: kochel@bcm.edu.
(2)Departments of Psychiatry, Pediatrics & Behavioral Neuroscience, Oregon Health
& Science University, Portland, OR, United States.
(3)Department of Psychological, Health, and Learning Sciences, University of
Houston, 491 Farish Hall, Houston, TX 77204, United States; Center for Clinical
Research and Evidence-Based Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Texas Medical School at Houston, 6431 Fannin Street, MSB 2.106, Houston, TX
77030, United States.
(4)Dan L. Duncan Institute for Clinical and Translational Research, Baylor
College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Suite 100D, Houston, TX 77030, United
States.
(5)Immunization Project, Texas Children's Hospital, 1102 Bates Avenue, Suite
1550, Houston, TX 77030, United States.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, United States;
Immunization Project, Texas Children's Hospital, 1102 Bates Avenue, Suite 1550,
Houston, TX 77030, United States.

Vaccine hesitancy may be more common among parents of children with autism
spectrum disorder (ASD). We examined factors associated with ASD-specific vaccine
hesitancy among caregivers of children with ASD who participated in the SPARK
study (Simons Foundation Powering Autism Research for Knowledge). 225
participants completed an online survey containing the Parent Attitudes About
Childhood Vaccines (PACV) questionnaire (measure of vaccine hesitancy) and the
Illness Perception Questionnaire revised for parents of children with ASD
(IPQ-R-ASD; measure of parents' views about ASD). 65 participants (28.8%) were
vaccine hesitant (PACV score ≥ 50); children of vaccine-hesitant parents (VHPs)
were less likely to be first born (n = 27, 41.5%), had greater ASD-symptom
severity (mean Social Communication Questionnaire score = 23.9, SD = 6.9), and
were more likely to have experienced developmental regression (n = 27, 50.9%) or 
plateau (n = 37, 69.8%). Compared to non-hesitant parents, VHPs significantly
more often endorsed accident/injury, deterioration of the child's immune system, 
diet, environmental pollution, general stress, parents' negative views, parents' 
behaviors/decisions, parents' emotional state, and vaccines as causes for ASD.
VHPs also had higher scores on the Personal Control, Treatment Control, Illness
Coherence, and Emotional Representations subscales of the IPQ-R than did
non-hesitant parents. In the final model, ASD-related vaccine hesitancy was
significantly associated with higher scores on the Emotional Representations
subscale (OR = 1.13, p = 0.10), agreement with deterioration of the child's
immunity as a cause of ASD (OR = 12.47, p < 0.001), the child not having achieved
fluent speech (OR = 2.67, p = 0.17), and the child experiencing a developmental
plateau (OR = 3.89, p = 0.002). Findings suggest that a combination of child
functioning and developmental history, as well as parents' negative views about
and their sense of control over ASD, influence vaccine hesitancy among parents of
children with ASD.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2020.07.034 
PMID: 32732144  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.


304. Clin Nutr. 2021 Jan;40(1):15-26. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2020.06.039. Epub 2020 Jul
14.

The sweet side of dark chocolate for chronic kidney disease patients.

Fanton S(1), Cardozo LFMF(2), Combet E(3), Shiels PG(4), Stenvinkel P(5), Vieira 
IO(6), Narciso HR(6), Schmitz J(6), Mafra D(7).

Author information: 
(1)Renal Vida Association, Blumenau, SC, Brazil; Graduate Program in
Cardiovascular Sciences, Federal Fluminense University, Niterói-Rio de Janeiro
RJ, Brazil. Electronic address: susanefanton@gmail.com.
(2)Graduate Program in Cardiovascular Sciences, Federal Fluminense University,
Niterói-Rio de Janeiro RJ, Brazil.
(3)School of Medicine, College of Medical, Veterinary & Life Sciences, University
of Glasgow, UK.
(4)Wolfson Wohl Translational Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Sciences,
University of Glasgow, UK.
(5)Division of Renal Medicine and Baxter Novum, Department of Clinical Science,
Technology and Intervention, Karolinska Instituted, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Renal Vida Association, Blumenau, SC, Brazil.
(7)Graduate Program in Cardiovascular Sciences, Federal Fluminense University,
Niterói-Rio de Janeiro RJ, Brazil; Graduate Program in Medical Sciences, Federal 
Fluminense University, Niterói-Rio de Janeiro RJ, Brazil. Electronic address:
dmafra30@gmail.com.

Chocolate is a widely appreciated foodstuff with historical appreciation as a
food from the gods. In addition to its highly palatable taste, it is a rich
source of (poly)phenolics, which have several proposed salutogenic effects,
including neuroprotective anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant and cardioprotective
capabilities. Despite the known benefits of this ancient foodstuff, there is a
paucity of information on the effects of chocolate in the context of chronic
kidney disease (CKD). This review focusses on the potential salutogenic
contribution of chocolate intake, to mitigate inflammatory and oxidative burden
in CKD, its potential, for cardiovascular protection and on the maintenance of
diversity in gut microbiota, as well as clinical perspectives, on regular
chocolate intake by CKD patients.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd and European Society for Clinical Nutrition and
Metabolism. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clnu.2020.06.039 
PMID: 32718711 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no
conflict of interests.


305. Am J Orthopsychiatry. 2020;90(6):751-759. doi: 10.1037/ort0000508. Epub 2020 Jul 
27.

Sources of functioning, symptoms of trauma, and psychological distress: A
cross-sectional study with Palestinian health workers operating in West Bank and 
Gaza strip.

Veronese G(1), Pepe A(1), Alzaanin W(1), Shoman H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Sciences.
(2)Department of Human Sciences & Education.

Health-care workers operating in conflict zones are at severe risk of
psychological consequences, given their extended exposure to traumatic events
under conditions of stress and violence. This quantitative, cross-sectional study
was designed to explore the relationships between personal resources (sources of 
functioning)-operationalized as sense of coherence, posttraumatic growth, and
perceived well-being-psychological distress, and trauma symptoms in a specific
population of health workers exposed to war and violence. Palestinian health
professionals (N = 181) completed quantitative measures of well-being,
posttraumatic growth, sense of coherence, psychological distress, and traumatic
response. The data were analyzed using structural equation modeling (SEM). The
outcomes suggest that sources of psychological functioning consistently play a
role in the mental health of different types of health professionals. Health-care
workers in an environment characterized by instability and ongoing risk need to
protect their own mental health by mobilizing sources of resistance and
resilience, such as a sense of coherence, subjective well-being, and growth. We
discuss the clinical implications of these findings and offer recommendations for
training and supervision. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2020 APA, all rights
reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/ort0000508 
PMID: 32718159 


306. Front Psychol. 2020 Jul 2;11:1516. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01516. eCollection
2020.

Sense of Coherence and Health-Related Quality of Life in Patients With Brain
Metastases.

Qiu X(1)(2), Zhang N(3), Pan SJ(2), Zhao P(4), Wu BW(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Research Center of Brain and Cognitive Neuroscience, Liaoning Normal
University, Dalian, China.
(4)Gamma Knife Center, Shandong Provincial Hospital, Jinan, China.
(5)Department of Nursing, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China.

With improvements in treatments for primary tumor and brain metastases (BM), the 
life expectancy of patients with advanced cancers is increasing; thus, helping
patients with BM maintain quality of life is becoming increasingly important.
Sense of coherence (SOC) has been found to be closely related to health-related
quality of life (HRQoL) in patients with chronic diseases, however, this
relationship has not been validated in patients with BM. This study first
examined the relationship between SOC and HRQoL in patients with BM, and further 
identified factors associated with SOC in these patients. Patients with BM
reported lower scores for most of the functioning subscales and for the general
rating of quality of life, and higher scores for most of the symptom subscales,
compared with a normative sample. SOC was significantly correlated with most
aspects of HRQoL in patients with BM. Further, SOC in the patients was associated
with awareness of the disease, possession of religious belief, and type of
primary cancer. These results validate the close relationship between SOC and
HRQoL in patients with BM, and indicate that SOC is associated with awareness of 
illness and religious belief.

Copyright © 2020 Qiu, Zhang, Pan, Zhao and Wu.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01516 
PMCID: PMC7343871
PMID: 32714254 


307. Front Psychol. 2020 Jul 2;11:1301. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01301. eCollection
2020.

On the Assessment of Functional Connectivity in an Immersive Brain-Computer
Interface During Motor Imagery.

Alanis-Espinosa M(1), Gutiérrez D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biomedical Signal Processing, Center for Research and Advanced
Studies (Cinvestav) at Monterrey, Apodaca, Mexico.

New trends on brain-computer interface (BCI) design are aiming to combine this
technology with immersive virtual reality in order to provide a sense of realism 
to its users. In this study, we propose an experimental BCI to control an
immersive telepresence system using motor imagery (MI). The system is immersive
in the sense that the users can control the movement of a NAO humanoid robot in a
first person perspective (1PP), i.e., as if the movement of the robot was his/her
own. We analyze functional brain connectivity between 1PP and 3PP during the
control of our BCI using graph theory properties such as degree, betweenness
centrality, and efficiency. Changes in these metrics are obtained for the case of
the 1PP, as well as for the traditional third person perspective (3PP) in which
the user can see the movement of the robot as feedback. As proof-of-concept,
electroencephalography (EEG) signals were recorded from two subjects while they
performed MI to control the movement of the robot. The graph theoretical analysis
was applied to the binary directed networks obtained through the partial directed
coherence (PDC). In our preliminary assessment we found that the efficiency in
the α brain rhythm is greater in 1PP condition in comparison to the 3PP at the
prefrontal cortex. Also, a stronger influence of signals measured at EEG channel 
C3 (primary motor cortex) to other regions was found in 1PP condition.
Furthermore, our preliminary results seem to indicate that α and β brain rhythms 
have a high indegree at prefrontal cortex in 1PP condition, and this could be
possibly related to the experience of sense of agency. Therefore, using the PDC
combined with graph theory while controlling a telepresence robot in an immersive
system may contribute to understand the organization and behavior of brain
networks in these environments.

Copyright © 2020 Alanis-Espinosa and Gutiérrez.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01301 
PMCID: PMC7343938
PMID: 32714232 


308. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Jul 17;17(14). pii: E5183. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17145183.

The Study Demands-Resources Framework: An Empirical Introduction.

Lesener T(1), Pleiss LS(1), Gusy B(1), Wolter C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Prevention and Psychosocial Health Research, Freie Universität
Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Based on the well-established job demands-resources (JD-R) framework, in our
study we introduce the novel study demands-resources (SD-R) framework. The SD-R
framework allows the study of salutogenic and pathogenic effects of university
settings on students' health and well-being. Using a large sample of university
students (n = 5660), our aim was to translate and validate the JD-R's essential
assumptions within the university context, and thus establish the SD-R framework.
We performed structural equation modelling to examine these essential
assumptions. As assumed, we found that study demands-the "bad things" at
university-predict student burnout (β = 0.50), whereas study resources-the "good 
things" at university-predict student engagement (β = 0.70) as well as burnout (β
= -0.35). Also, in line with the SD-R's assumptions, student burnout predicts
life satisfaction negatively (β = -0.34), whereas student engagement predicts
life satisfaction positively (β = 0.29). Hence, we were able to introduce the
novel SD-R framework and validate its core assumptions. The SD-R framework serves
as an excellent theoretical basis to examine both the salutogenic and pathogenic 
effects of the study context on students' health and well-being. However, the
framework needs further longitudinal and meta-analytical verification in
accordance with the research on the JD-R framework.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17145183 
PMCID: PMC7400357
PMID: 32709128  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Jul 21;17(14). pii: E5250. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17145250.

Sense of Coherence, Health, Well-Being, and Work Satisfaction before and after
Implementing Activity-Based Workplaces.

Wijk K(1)(2)(3), Bergsten EL(2), Hallman DM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research and Development, Region Gavleborg/Uppsala University, 801 
87 Gavle, Sweden.
(2)Faculty of Health and Occupational Studies, Department of Occupational Health 
Sciences and Psychology, University of Gavle, 801 76 Gävle, Sweden.
(3)Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Uppsala University, 751 23
Uppsala, Sweden.

Activity-based workplaces (ABWs) are implemented with possible implications for
health, well-being, and work satisfaction in the workplace. Drawing on the
theoretical framework, i.e., sense of coherence (SOC), the aim was to investigate
how indicators pf SOC-meaningfulness, manageability and comprehensibility-are
associated with, or function as barriers or facilitators for, health, well-being 
and work satisfaction during relocation to an ABW. We followed the implementation
of ABWs at the Swedish Transport Administration (2018-2019). Questionnaires were 
administered before (n = 536), 3 months (n = 409) and 9 months (n = 373) after
relocation. Focus group interviews (15) were conducted before and after. Data
were analyzed using repeated measures ANOVA and content analysis. Relocation to
an ABW was associated with a reduced work satisfaction (physical p < 0.001;
psychosocial p < 0.001), and minor changes in health and occupational well-being 
during relocation (p > 0.001). The reduction in work satisfaction was smaller
among employees with high meaningfulness in the relocation process (p < 0.001).
All SOC indicators were positively associated with overall health, well-being and
work satisfaction (p < 0.001). Interviews suggested that meaningfulness was
facilitated by participation in the presented activities and that communication
before relocation was crucial. The results indicate that organizations
implementing ABWs should promote perceived meaningfulness in the process to
mitigate possible declines in satisfaction with the physical and psychosocial
work environment.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17145250 
PMCID: PMC7400008
PMID: 32708136  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Addict Dis. 2020 Oct-Dec;38(4):529-539. doi: 10.1080/10550887.2020.1794494.
Epub 2020 Jul 24.

Sense of coherence as a recovery capital in recovery from substance use
disorders.

Chen G(1), Gueta K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Criminology, Ashkelon Academic College, Ashkelon, Israel.
(2)Department of Criminology, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Recovery from substance use disorders without treatment has long been
of interest to researchers and practitioners. The aim of the study was to examine
the role of sense of coherence and recovery capital in long-term recovery without
treatment and the association between the two concepts.
METHOD: This cross-sectional study was conducted among 229 Israeli respondents,
134 of them self-changers and 95 treatment-changers. The respondents completed
the Addiction Severity Index, the Sense of Coherence Questionnaire, the Childhood
Trauma Questionnaire, and the Recovery Capital Questionnaire.
RESULTS: Significant differences between the two groups were found. The
self-changers had a higher sense of coherence (p < .001) and reported more
cannabis use. No significant group differences were found in recovery capital.
The treatment-changers had experienced significantly more child abuse (p < .001) 
and suffered from severe psychiatric problems (p = .019), compared with the
self-changers. Significant correlations were found between higher sense of
coherence and lower psychiatric severity (p < .001), lower rate of child abuse (p
< .001), and self-change (p = .037). A strong relationship was found between
sense of coherence and recovery capital (p < .001), showing that the two concepts
were moderately to highly interrelated.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings signify the central role of sense of coherence in
recovery and the importance of strengthening sense of coherence, which may
promote health-related outcomes.

DOI: 10.1080/10550887.2020.1794494 
PMID: 32705944 


311. Child Psychiatry Hum Dev. 2020 Oct;51(5):839-852. doi:
10.1007/s10578-020-01028-y.

Parent Management Training Oregon Model and Family-Based Services as Usual for
Behavioral Problems in Youth: A National Randomized Controlled Trial in Denmark.

Scavenius C(1), Chacko A(2), Lindberg MR(3), Granski M(4), Vardanian MM(4),
Pontoppidan M(1), Hansen H(1), Eiberg M(1).

Author information: 
(1)VIVE - The Danish Center for Social Science Research, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)New York University, New York, NY, USA. anil.chacko@nyu.edu.
(3)Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark.
(4)New York University, New York, NY, USA.

This randomized control trial used intent-to-treat analyses to compare parent
management training-Oregon model (PMTO) (N = 64) to family-based services as
usual (SAU) (N = 62) in 3.5-13-year-old children and their families in Denmark.
Outcomes were parent report of child internalizing and externalizing problems,
parenting efficacy, parenting stress, parent sense of coherence, parent-report of
life satisfaction, and parental depressive symptoms. Outcomes were measured at
pretreatment, post-treatment, and 18-20 months post-treatment. Results
demonstrated that both PMTO and family-based SAU resulted in significant
improvements in child externalizing and internalizing problems, parenting
efficacy, as well as parent-reported stress and depressive symptoms, life
satisfaction, and aspects of sense of cohesion. Effect sizes at post-treatment
and follow-up were in the small to moderate range, consistent with prior PMTO
evaluations. However, there were no significant differences between PMTO and
family-based SAU. Further research on the process and content of family-based SAU
is needed to determine how this approach overlaps with and is distinct from PMTO.

DOI: 10.1007/s10578-020-01028-y 
PMID: 32705460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2020 Nov-Dec;32(7-8):579-593. doi:
10.1080/09540261.2020.1789074. Epub 2020 Jul 24.

Sense of coherence in systemic family therapy trainees in times of change.

Mayer CH(1)(2), Oosthuizen RM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial Psychology and People Management, Auckland Park
Campus, University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(2)Institut für Therapeutische Kommunikation und Sprachgebrauch, Europa
Universität Viadrina, Frankfurt (Oder), Germany.
(3)Department of Industrial and Organisational Psychology, School of Management
Sciences, College of Economic and Management Sciences, University of South
Africa, Pretoria, South Africa.

This study aimed at qualitatively exploring the development of a sense of
coherence (SOC) among systemic family therapist trainees (FTT) over a 3-year
period. It was conducted in a private family therapy training institute in
central Germany. The sample consisted of 66 trainees. The components of SOC and
their general health played an important role in the development of FTTs
throughout the three training years. Findings show that the SOC component of
meaningfulness (motivation) was most frequently mentioned and most important to
participants' personal and professional development, followed by
comprehensibility (understanding of self, others and the context) and finally by 
manageability (coping with challenges based on personal, social and professional 
resources). The three SOC components fostered a positive self-care approach in
FTTs and improved health and well-being over the 3 years. Visions of FTT at the
end of the training show that they aim at personal and professional growth and
development in the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR).

DOI: 10.1080/09540261.2020.1789074 
PMID: 32703049 


313. Acta Biomed. 2020 Jul 20;91(9-S):61-75. doi: 10.23750/abm.v91i9-S.10115.

COVID-19 and Living space challenge. Well-being and Public Health recommendations
for a healthy, safe, and sustainable housing.

D'Alessandro D(1), Gola M(2), Appolloni L(3), Dettori M(4), Fara GM(5), Rebecchi 
A(6), Settimo G(7), Capolongo S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Sapienza University of Rome, Department of Civil Building Environmental
Engineering (DICEA). daniela.dalessandro@uniroma1.it.
(2)Polytechnic University of Milan, Department of Architecture, Built Environment
and Construction Engineering (DABC). marco.gola@polimi.it.
(3)Sapienza University of Rome, Department of Civil Building Environmental
Engineering (DICEA). letizia.appolloni@uniroma1.it.
(4)University of Sassari, Department of Medical, Surgical and Experimental
Sciences. madettori@uniss.it.
(5)Sapienza University of Rome, Department of Public Health and Infectious
diseases (DSPMI). gaetanomaria.fara@uniroma1.it.
(6)Polytechnic University of Milan, Department of Architecture, Built Environment
and Construction Engineering (DABC). andrea.rebecchi@polimi.it.
(7)National Institute of Health, Rome. gaetano.settimo@iss.it.
(8)Polytechnic University of Milan, Department of Architecture, Built Environment
and Construction Engineering (DABC). stefano.capolongo@polimi.it.

BACKGROUND AND AIM OF THE WORK: The ongoing pandemic of COVID-19 is a strong
reminder that the lockdown period has changed the way that people and communities
live, work, and interact, and it's necessary to make resilient the built
environment, both outdoor and mainly the indoor spaces: housing, workplaces,
public buildings, and entertainment facilities. How can we re-design the concept 
of Well-being and Public Health in relation to the living places of the future?
METHODS: According to the previous statements and scenario, this paper aims to
integrate the building hygiene and well-being, focusing the possible responses,
both existing and for the new buildings, taking home a strong message from this
"period" of physical distancing.
RESULTS: The Well-being and Public Health recommendations for a healthy, safe,
and sustainable housing are framed into the following key points: 1. Visible and 
accessible green elements and spaces; 2. Flexibility, adaptability, sharing, and 
crowding of living spaces, and compliant functions located into the buildings; 3.
Re-appropriation of the basic principles and archetypes of sustainable
architecture, thermal comfort and Indoor Air Quality (IAQ); 4. Water consumption 
and Wastewater Management; 5. Urban Solid Waste Management; 6. Housing automation
and electromagnetic fields; 7. Indoor building and finishing materials.
CONCLUSIONS: The Well-being and Public Health recommendations for a healthy, safe
and sustainable housing may provide a useful basis for Designers, Policy Makers
(fostering tax incentives for building renewal), Public Health experts and Local 
Health Agencies, in promoting actions and policies aimed to transform living
places in healthier and Salutogenic spaces.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v91i9-S.10115 
PMCID: PMC8023091
PMID: 32701918  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Holist Nurs. 2021 Mar;39(1):16-28. doi: 10.1177/0898010120942965. Epub 2020 Jul
23.

Associations Between Nurse-Patient Interaction and Sense of Coherence Among
Cognitively Intact Nursing Home Residents.

Drageset J(1)(2), Taasen SE, Espehaug B, Kuven BM, Eide WM(1), André B, Rinnan
E(3), Haugan G(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Western Norway University of Applied Sciences.
(2)University of Bergen.
(3)Norwegian University of Science and Technology.
(4)Nord University.

Aim: To investigate the association between nurse-patient interaction and sense
of coherence among cognitively intact nursing home residents. Method: In a
cross-sectional design, data were collected in 2017 and 2018 using the
Nurse-Patient Interaction Scale (NPIS) and the 13-item Sense of Coherence Scale
(SOC-13). Of the 204 cognitively intact nursing home residents who met the
inclusion criteria, 188 (92%) participated, representing 27 nursing homes.
Multiple regression in a general linear model estimated the possible effects of
the 14 NPIS items on SOC-13 sum score, the possible effects of the NPIS (sum
score) on SOC-13 (sum score) as well as on the subdimensions of SOC-13,
comprehensibility, meaningfulness, and manageability (both without and with
adjusting for sex and age). Results: Four of the 14 NPIS items revealed highly
significant correlations with SOC-13 (sum score; unadjusted and adjusted for age 
and gender). Furthermore, the analysis adjusted for age and gender showed
significant associations for NPIS (sum score) with SOC-13 (sum score),
manageability, and comprehensibility. The correlation between NPIS and
meaningfulness was not statistically significant. Conclusion: Nurse-patient
interaction is significantly associated with SOC-13 and its subdimensions of
comprehensibility and manageability but not meaningfulness. Nurse-patient
interaction might be an important resource in relation to residents' sense of
coherence and its subdimensions.

DOI: 10.1177/0898010120942965 
PMCID: PMC8041445
PMID: 32700622 


315. Int J Comput Assist Radiol Surg. 2020 Oct;15(10):1699-1702. doi:
10.1007/s11548-020-02224-w. Epub 2020 Jul 22.

Needle tip force estimation by deep learning from raw spectral OCT data.

Gromniak M(1), Gessert N(2), Saathoff T(2), Schlaefer A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, Hamburg University of Technology, Hamburg,
Germany. martin.gromniak@tuhh.de.
(2)Institute of Medical Technology, Hamburg University of Technology, Hamburg,
Germany.

PURPOSE: Needle placement is a challenging problem for applications such as
biopsy or brachytherapy. Tip force sensing can provide valuable feedback for
needle navigation inside the tissue. For this purpose, fiber-optical sensors can 
be directly integrated into the needle tip. Optical coherence tomography (OCT)
can be used to image tissue. Here, we study how to calibrate OCT to sense forces,
e.g., during robotic needle placement.
METHODS: We investigate whether using raw spectral OCT data without a typical
image reconstruction can improve a deep learning-based calibration between
optical signal and forces. For this purpose, we consider three different needles 
with a new, more robust design which are calibrated using convolutional neural
networks (CNNs). We compare training the CNNs with the raw OCT signal and the
reconstructed depth profiles.
RESULTS: We find that using raw data as an input for the largest CNN model
outperforms the use of reconstructed data with a mean absolute error of 5.81 mN
compared to 8.04 mN.
CONCLUSIONS: We find that deep learning with raw spectral OCT data can improve
learning for the task of force estimation. Our needle design and calibration
approach constitute a very accurate fiber-optical sensor for measuring forces at 
the needle tip.

DOI: 10.1007/s11548-020-02224-w 
PMCID: PMC7502064
PMID: 32700243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Cureus. 2020 Jun 20;12(6):e8713. doi: 10.7759/cureus.8713.

The Five Diaphragms in Osteopathic Manipulative Medicine: Neurological
Relationships, Part 2.

Bordoni B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Foundation Don Carlo Gnocchi, Milan,
ITA.

The main objective of the osteopath and that of osteopathic manipulative medicine
(OMM) is to create space between the different tissues. The sliding capacity of
the various tissue layers and between the different body components, up to the
possibility of movement between cells is the salutogenic stimulus to allow the
circulation of fluids, the biochemical exchange, and the adequate management of
the multiple internal and external stimuli that perturb the body living. Movement
is allowed by space and space is life. In this second part, the exposure of the
anatomical neurological relationships of the five diaphragms continues,
highlighting the relationships of the thoracic outlet, the respiratory diaphragm,
and the pelvic floor. Finally, there will be clinical reflections to further
corroborate the existence of the anatomical continuum and to lay the scientific
foundations for an OMM approach to body diaphragms.

Copyright © 2020, Bordoni et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.8713 
PMCID: PMC7372241
PMID: 32699708 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


317. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Jul 20;17(14). pii: E5230. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17145230.

Personal and Family Resources Related to Depressive and Anxiety Symptoms in Women
during Puerperium.

Feligreras-Alcalá D(1), Frías-Osuna A(1), Del-Pino-Casado R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Jaén, 23071
Jaén, Spain.

Introduction: This study investigated the relationship between personal and
family resources (i.e., social support, family functioning, self-efficacy in
care, sense of coherence and perceived burden of care) and depressive and anxiety
symptoms in women during the puerperium, adjusting for stressors. Methods: This
is a quantitative research design, carried out through a descriptive,
cross-sectional correlation study. This study includes 212 women over the age of 
19 who gave birth from March to September 2019 in Maternal and Child Hospital of 
Jaén (Spain). Women were selected during the immediate postpartum period. The
variables analysed were postpartum depressive symptoms (Edinburgh scale), anxiety
symptoms (STAI state anxiety questionnaire), perceived social support
(Duke-UNC-11), family functioning (family APGAR), self-efficacy in care (Lawton),
sense of coherence (SOC-13), perceived burden (Caregiver Strain Index) and
stressful life events (Holmes and Rahe). The main analysis consisted of a
multiple linear regression. Results: The regression model of depressive symptoms 
found a positive association with perceived burden (β = 0.230, p = 0.015) and
negative associations with self-efficacy in care (β = -0.348, p < 0.001), social 
support (β = -0.161, p < 0.001) and sense of coherence (β = -0.081, p = 0.001).
The regression model of anxiety symptoms obtained a positive association with
perceived burden (β = 1.052, p < 0.001) and negative associations with
self-efficacy in care (β = -0.329, p = 0.041), social support (β = -0.234, p =
0.001) and sense of coherence (β = -0.262, p < 0.001). Discussion: Firstly,
depressive and anxiety symptoms in the puerperium period may be more prevalent
than in other periods of a woman's life. Secondly, perceived social support,
self-efficacy in caring for the newborn and sense of coherence may be protective 
factors for depressive and anxiety symptoms in the puerperium period. Finally,
perceived burden in caring for the newborn may be a risk factor for these
symptoms.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17145230 
PMCID: PMC7400701
PMID: 32698403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Int J Offender Ther Comp Criminol. 2021 Apr;65(5):590-612. doi:
10.1177/0306624X20944685. Epub 2020 Jul 22.

Psychosocial Quality of Life and Its' Correlates in People Serving Prison
Sentences in Penitentiary Institutions.

Skowroński B(1), Talik E(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Warsaw, Warszawa, Poland.
(2)The John Paul II Catholic University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.

The aim of the present study was to identify and analyze the determinants of
prison inmates' psychosocial quality of life (PQol) as a positive and negative
correlates. Three hundred ninety prison inmates were recruited from the
correctional facilities administered by the Warsaw District Inspectorate of
Prisons. Data were collected by means of the SQLQ, SOC-29, SWS, SPI/TPI, SIPR,
COPE, GSES questionnaires and analyzed by means of SEM. The positive correlates
for prison inmates' PQol are: sense of coherence, self-efficacy, intensity of
religious attitude, social support, and trait curiosity. Among the strategies of 
coping with stress, only seeking social support for emotional reasons is a
significant factor that directly predicts PQol. Substance use and planning play
only a mediating role in PQol prediction. The negative correlate for inmates'
PQol is trait depression. Contrary to predictions, anxiety is not a negative
correlate-as noted above, it is associated with a positive score on PQol.

DOI: 10.1177/0306624X20944685 
PMID: 32697119 


319. Clin Psychol Psychother. 2021 Jan;28(1):124-136. doi: 10.1002/cpp.2494. Epub 2020
Aug 2.

The supervisory relationship from an attachment perspective: Connections to
burnout and sense of coherence in health professionals.

Hiebler-Ragger M(1)(2), Nausner L(3), Blaha A(4), Grimmer K(5), Korlath S(6),
Mernyi M(7), Unterrainer HF(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapeutic Medicine, Medical University of
Graz, Graz, Austria.
(2)Center for Integrative Addiction Research (CIAR), Grüner Kreis Society,
Vienna, Austria.
(3)Specialist Faculty of Integrative Gestalt (IG) Therapy, Austrian Working Group
for Group Therapy and Group Dynamics (ÖAGG), Vienna, Austria.
(4)Specialist Faculty of Group Psychoanalysis (GPA), Austrian Working Group for
Group Therapy and Group Dynamics (ÖAGG), Vienna, Austria.
(5)Specialist Faculty of Psychodrama (PD), Austrian Working Group for Group
Therapy and Group Dynamics (ÖAGG), Vienna, Austria.
(6)Specialist Faculty of Group Dynamics and Dynamic Group (DG) Therapy, Austrian 
Working Group for Group Therapy and Group Dynamics (ÖAGG), Vienna, Austria.
(7)Specialist Faculty of Systemic Family (SF) Therapy, Austrian Working Group for
Group Therapy and Group Dynamics (ÖAGG), Vienna, Austria.

Supervision is an essential part of the training and work environment of health
professionals, especially of psychotherapists and clinical/health psychologists. 
However, although the supervisory process is always a relational one and may
therefore be influenced by attachment dynamics, the importance of the supervisory
relationship for the professional's performance and the well-being of the
supervisee has yet to be fully examined. In this cross-sectional observational
study, the Experiences in Close Relationships-Revised (ECR-RD; avoidant and
anxious attachment), the Supervisory Relationship Questionnaire (SRQ), the
Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBI) and the Sense of Coherence Scale (SOC-13) were
analysed for 346 (81.8% female) health professionals. Considering professional
experience and number of supervision sessions as control variables, a better
supervisory relationship negatively predicted burnout symptoms (β = -.31) but
positively predicted sense of coherence (β = .31, both p < .01). The final model,
including avoidant and anxious attachment as additional predictors, explained 30%
of the variance in burnout symptoms and 41% of the variance in sense of
coherence. The results underline the importance of the supervisory relationship
for the well-being and the professional performance of health professionals.
Interactions between the supervisory relationship and underlying attachment
parameters should be further explored in future studies.

© 2020 The Authors. Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cpp.2494 
PMCID: PMC7891645
PMID: 32691477 


320. Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2020 Jul;25(3):547-549. doi:
10.1177/1359104520933060.

Paediatric psychology services: Keeping the mind and body connected.

Christie D(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Professor of paediatric and adolescent psychology.
(2)University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation trust.
(3)Department of child and adolescent psychological services.

DOI: 10.1177/1359104520933060 
PMID: 32683980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


321. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2020 Jul 17;21(1):469. doi: 10.1186/s12891-020-03483-z.

Patients' and clinicians' perspectives on a 'fast-track' pathway for patients
with sciatica in primary care: qualitative findings from the SCOPiC stratified
care trial.

Saunders B(1), Konstantinou K(2)(3), Artus M(2), Foster NE(2)(4), Bartlam B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Primary Care Centre Versus Arthritis, School of Primary, Community and Social 
Care, Keele University, Staffordshire, ST5 5BG, UK. b.saunders@keele.ac.uk.
(2)Primary Care Centre Versus Arthritis, School of Primary, Community and Social 
Care, Keele University, Staffordshire, ST5 5BG, UK.
(3)Haywood Hospital, Midlands Partnership Foundation NHS Trust, Staffordshire,
UK.
(4)Keele Clinical Trials Unit (CTU), David Weatherall Building, Keele University,
Staffordshire, ST5 5BG, UK.

Comment in
    Br J Gen Pract. 2020 Oct 1;70(699):505.

BACKGROUND: Sciatica is common and associated with significant impacts for the
individual and society. The SCOPiC randomised controlled trial (RCT) (trial
registration: ISRCTN75449581 ) tested stratified primary care for sciatica by
subgrouping patients into one of three groups based on prognostic and clinical
indicators. Patients in one group were 'fast-tracked' for a magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) scan and spinal specialist opinion. This paper reports qualitative 
research exploring patients' and clinicians' perspectives on the acceptability of
this 'fast-track' pathway.
METHODS: Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 20 patients and 20
clinicians (general practitioners, spinal specialist physiotherapists, spinal
surgeons). Data were analysed thematically and findings explored using
Normalisation Process Theory (NPT) and 'boundary objects' concept.
RESULTS: Whilst the 'fast-track' pathway achieved a degree of 'coherence' (i.e.
made sense) to both patients and clinicians, particularly in relation to
providing early reassurance based on MRI scan findings, it was less 'meaningful' 
to some clinicians for managing patients with acute symptoms, reflecting a
reluctance to move away from the usual 'stepped care' approach. Both groups felt 
a key limitation of the pathway was that it did not shorten patient waiting times
between their spinal specialist consultation and further treatments.
CONCLUSION: Findings contribute new knowledge about patients' and clinicians'
perspectives on the role of imaging and spinal specialist opinion in the
management of sciatica, and provide important insights for understanding the
'fast-track' pathway, as part of the stratified care model tested in the RCT.
Future research into the early referral of patients with sciatica for
investigation and specialist opinion should include strategies to support
clinician behaviour change; as well as take into account the role of imaging in
providing reassurance to patients with severe symptoms in cases where imaging
reveals a clear explanation for the patient's pain, and where this is accompanied
by a thorough explanation from a trusted clinical expert.

DOI: 10.1186/s12891-020-03483-z 
PMCID: PMC7367249
PMID: 32680487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Jul 15;17(14). pii: E5106. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17145106.

Acculturative Stress among Arab Students in Israel: The Roles of Sense of
Coherence and Coping Strategies.

Abu-Kaf S(1), Khalaf E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Conflict Management and Resolution Program, Department of Multidisciplinary
Studies, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva 8410501, Israel.

BACKGROUND: In Israeli colleges and universities, many Arab students experience
acculturative stress. Such stress arises from the need to learn new cultural
rules, manage the overarching conflict inherent in maintaining elements of their 
culture of origin (i.e., Arab culture) while incorporating elements of the host
culture (i.e., Jewish academic culture), and deal with experiences of prejudice
and discrimination present in the host culture.
METHODS: This study investigated the association between acculturative stress and
depressive symptoms among 170 Arab undergraduates from northern and central
Israel. It also explored the roles of sense of coherence and coping strategies in
the relationship between acculturative stress and depressive symptoms.
Participants completed questionnaires on acculturative stress, depressive
symptoms, sense of coherence, coping strategies, and demographics.
RESULTS: The findings reveal gender differences in the use of different coping
strategies and in levels of depressive symptoms. However, academic-year
differences were found only in levels of sense of coherence and depressive
symptoms. Specifically, female students expressed higher levels of both active
and avoidant coping. Moreover, female students and those in their first and
second years of university studies reported higher levels of depressive symptoms.
Among the male students, acculturative stress was related to depressive symptoms 
indirectly via sense of coherence and active coping. In contrast, among the
female students, acculturative stress was related to depressive symptoms both
directly and indirectly via sense of coherence and avoidant coping. Among first- 
and second-year students, acculturative stress was related to depressive symptoms
indirectly via sense of coherence and avoidant coping. However, among third- and 
fourth-year students, acculturative stress was related to depressive symptoms
both directly and indirectly via sense of coherence.
CONCLUSIONS: This article underscores the significance of gender and
academic-year differences in pathways involving acculturative stress.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17145106 
PMCID: PMC7400605
PMID: 32679817  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Pediatr Nurs. 2021 Jan-Feb;56:e7-e18. doi: 10.1016/j.pedn.2020.06.017. Epub
2020 Jul 13.

Use of Salutogenic Approach Among Children and Adolescents with Chronic
Illnesses: A Scoping Review.

Shorey S(1), Ng ED(2).

Author information: 
(1)Alice Lee Centre for Nursing Studies, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore. Electronic address:
nurssh@nus.edu.sg.
(2)Alice Lee Centre for Nursing Studies, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore.

PROBLEM: A pathogenic medical orientation focusing on disease management relies
heavily on the skills of healthcare professionals. In contrast, a salutogenic
approach focuses on health promotion by encouraging resource strengthening among 
patients to maintain and support recovery, which could help alleviate healthcare 
burden and enhance healthcare quality. Considering the increased life
expectancies of chronically ill children, this review aimed to consolidate
evidence on the use of salutogenesis among children and adolescents with chronic 
illnesses.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: A scoping review guided by Arksey and O'Malley's five-stage
framework was conducted. Studies with samples of children or adolescents aged
19 years and below with chronic disease were included in the review.
SAMPLE: A library search was performed across six electronic databases (PubMed,
Embase, CINAHL, PsycInfo, and Web of Science) from each database's inception to
March 2020. Twelve studies were included.
RESULTS: Current evidence only highlighted the trend and advantages of high sense
of coherence and identify factors that enhance sense of coherence. Boys, younger 
age, higher cognitive functioning, non-migrants, non-smokers, and available peer 
and family support contribute to higher levels of sense of coherence, which lead 
to better perceived health, quality of life, and more positive coping strategies.
CONCLUSIONS: Healthcare professionals should adopt a salutogenic approach to
encourage patient involvement, independence, and responsibility in maintaining
their own health.
IMPLICATIONS: Further research is needed to provide a holistic view of the sense 
of coherence and application of salutogenesis (especially other salutogenic
concepts) among this sample group, which can also inform future salutogenic
intervention studies.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pedn.2020.06.017 
PMID: 32674853  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that there is no conflict of interest.


324. J Curr Ophthalmol. 2020 Apr 30;32(2):203-206. doi: 10.4103/JOCO.JOCO_105_20.
eCollection 2020 Apr-Jun.

The Effect of Topical Bromfenac on Intraretinal and Subretinal Fluid in
Neovascular Age-Related Macular Degeneration.

Abdolrahimzadeh S(1), Fameli V(2), Tizio FD(1), Staso FD(1), Fenicia V(1),
Scuderi G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology Unit, Neurosciences, Mental Health and Sensory Organs
Department, St. Andrea Hospital, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(2)Ophthalmology Unit, Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome,
Rome, Italy.

Purpose: To report the effect of topical bromfenac, a non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), in a case of neovascular age-related macular
degeneration (AMD).
Methods: An 85-year-old woman presented with a complaint of visual acuity
reduction in the right eye. Comprehensive ophthalmological examination and
retinal imaging were performed.
Results: Best corrected visual acuity was 2/100. Fundus examination showed
reticular pseudodrusen and a small hemorrhage in the fovea. Fluorescein
angiography showed an active neovascular membrane. Spectral-domain optical
coherence tomography (SD-OCT) confirmed diagnosis and revealed subretinal and
intraretinal fluid. The patient refused recommended intravitreal anti-vascular
endothelial growth factor treatment and received topical bromfenac 0.09% twice
daily. Follow-up with SD-OCT showed subretinal followed by intraretinal fluid
reduction at 16 weeks after treatment.
Conclusion: Short-term reduction of subretinal and intraretinal fluid was
observed with topical bromfenac monotherapy in neovascular AMD.

Copyright: © 2020 Journal of Current Ophthalmology.

DOI: 10.4103/JOCO.JOCO_105_20 
PMCID: PMC7337015
PMID: 32671307 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest. Presentation 
at a conference: 6th International OCT Angiography and Advances in OCT Congress, 
14-15th December 2018, Rome Italy.


325. J Family Med Prim Care. 2020 Apr 30;9(4):2137-2138. doi:
10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_184_20. eCollection 2020 Apr.

Salutogenesis and Yoga - Are they similar?

Doomra R(1), Goyal A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Manav Rachna Dental College, Faridabad, Haryana,
India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Manav Rachna Dental College, Faridabad, Haryana,
India.

DOI: 10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_184_20 
PMCID: PMC7346939
PMID: 32670984 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


326. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2020 Nov;21(11):1684-1688. doi: 10.1016/j.jamda.2020.04.036. 
Epub 2020 Jul 12.

Healthcare Utilization After Stroke: A 1-Year Prospective Study.

Minet LR(1), Peterson E(2), von Koch L(3), Ytterberg C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,
Denmark; Department of Rehabilitation, Odense University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark; The Health Research Center, UCL University College, Odense, Denmark.
Electronic address: Lisbeth.minet@rsyd.dk.
(2)Department of Occupational Therapy, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden; Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,
Denmark; Department of Rehabilitation, Odense University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark; Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: This study was undertaken to investigate the predictive value of
disease-related factors, contextual factors, and functioning on the use of
healthcare for 1 year after stroke.
DESIGN: A prospective study.
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: In total, 219 patients with stroke admitted to a
hospital stroke unit were included.
METHODS: Data were obtained through medical records, structured interviews, and
assessments. Multivariable regression analyses were used to explore the
association between the independent variables (stroke severity, comorbidity, age,
sex, civil status, private financing, sense of coherence, cognitive function,
walking ability, social everyday activities prestroke, and recent fall) and the
use of inpatient or outpatient care 0 to 3, 3 to 6 and 6 to 12 months after
stroke.
RESULTS: Mean age of the participants was 70 years, 43% were women, and 71%
experienced mild stroke severity. All participants received inpatient care at 0
to 3 months, about one-fifth used inpatient care at 3 to 6 or 6 to 12 months, and
all received outpatient care all 3 time periods. Moderate-severe stroke
(P < .001), a lower age (P = .002), and walking disability (P < .001) were
associated with a higher use of inpatient care 0 to 3 months after stroke. Living
alone (P = .025) and recent fall (P = .05) were associated with a higher use of
inpatient care 3 to 6 months after stroke. None of the independent variables were
associated with use of inpatient care 6 to 12 months. Moderate-severe stroke
(0-3; 3-6 months: P < .001, 6-12 months: P = .004), a lower age (0-3 months:
P = .002, 3-6 months: P = .001, 6-12 months: P = .006), and walking disability
(P < .001) were associated with a higher use of outpatient care in all 3 time
periods.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Moderate-severe stroke, lower age, and walking
disability are important predictors of healthcare utilization after stroke. The
findings inform efforts to identify and support people with stroke who have the
potential for high healthcare utilization in the year post stroke.

Copyright © 2020 AMDA – The Society for Post-Acute and Long-Term Care Medicine.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jamda.2020.04.036 
PMID: 32669239  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Affect Disord. 2020 Sep 1;274:1206-1210. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2020.04.023. Epub
2020 May 11.

Sense of coherence predicts adolescent mental health.

Carlén K(1), Suominen S(2), Lindmark U(3), Saarinen MM(4), Aromaa M(5), Rautava
P(6), Sillanpää M(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, University of Skövde, Skövde, Sweden; The Research 
School of Health and Welfare, Jönköping University, Jönköping, Sweden. Electronic
address: kristina.carlen@his.se.
(2)School of Health Sciences, University of Skövde, Skövde, Sweden; University of
Turku, Department of Public Health, Turku, Finland.
(3)School of Health and Welfare, Department of Natural Sciences and Biomedicine, 
Centre for Oral Health, Jönköping University, Jönköping, Sweden; Department of
Health Sciences, Karlstad University, Karlstad, Sweden.
(4)Department of General Practice, University of Turku and Turku University
Hospital, Turku, Finland.
(5)University of Turku, Department of Public Health, Turku, Finland; City of
Turku Welfare Division, Turku, Finland.
(6)University of Turku, Department of Public Health, Turku, Finland; Turku
University Hospital, Turku, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Strong sense of coherence (SOC) has been shown to predict good mental
health among adults whereas its predictive value in adolescence is unclear. This 
life-course oriented prospective study explores whether SOC predicts mental
health in a three-year follow-up.
METHODS: The data is part of the ongoing 'Finnish Family Competence Study'
launched in 1986 in southwestern Finland (baseline n = 1287). The outcome
variable was adolescent's mental health at 18 years of age, measured on the
Development and Well-Being Assessment (DAWBA) scale. The main predictor was
Antonovsky's SOC score (1987) measured at the age of 15. A total of 498
adolescents were included in the present analyses. Poisson regression was used by
univariate and multivariable models using the parents' age and socioeconomic
status and adolescents' gender as covariates.
RESULTS: Multivariable analysis showed that a one-unit increase in SOC decreased 
the relative risk of a DAWBA-based diagnosis by 4 % (RR [95% CI] 0.96
[0.94-0.98], p < 0.001).
LIMITATIONS: Typical of very long follow-up, as in our study of nearly two
decades, a substantial proportion of the original population-based cohort was
lost to follow-up weakening the representability of our cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: Sense of coherence is a useful and clinically sensitive tool to
predict mental health in adolescence. The easily administered, coping-oriented
SOC questionnaire is an appropriate instrument in screening for adolescents who
would benefit from supportive measures to strengthen their mental well-being.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2020.04.023 
PMID: 32663952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None


328. BMC Med Educ. 2020 Jul 13;20(1):219. doi: 10.1186/s12909-020-02134-0.

Effect of stress coping ability and working hours on burnout among residents.

Kijima S(1)(2), Tomihara K(3), Tagawa M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Innovation in Medical and Dental Education, Graduate School of
Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima,
890-8544, Japan.
(2)Osumi Kanoya Hospital, 6081-1 Shinkawacho, Kanoya, Kagoshima, 893-0015, Japan.
(3)Department of Psychology, Faculty of Law, Economics, and Humanities, Kagoshima
University, 1-21-30 Korimoto, Kagoshima, 890-0065, Japan.
(4)Center for Innovation in Medical and Dental Education, Graduate School of
Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima,
890-8544, Japan. Masami@m3.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Burnout among residents leads to interruptions in training and even
to exit from programs. Despite the implementation of working hour restrictions in
the U.S. in 2013, the high rate of burnout remains a serious problem. Therefore, 
we analyzed Japanese residents' burnout, training conditions, and associated
factors, especially stress coping ability, which could become an evidence base
for creating guidelines of programs and working environments.
METHODS: In total, 37 teaching hospitals were randomly selected, and all
residents in the third and fifteenth months of a residency program at these
hospitals were targeted for this research. We analyzed the residents' burnout
rates, associated factors, and interactions using response data from a
self-administered questionnaire consisting of the Japanese versions of the
Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBI) and the Sense of Coherence (SOC) scale, as well
as items asking about their training environments, gender, and age.
RESULTS: Overall, 48 (49.5%) of 97 residents in 18 teaching hospitals (62 and 35 
in the third and fifteenth months, respectively), whose average working hours
were 63.3 h per week, were judged as having burnout, among whom, 33 (53.2%) and
15 (42.9%) had burnout in the third and fifteenth months, respectively. Logistic 
regression analysis indicated that working hours and 10 items on the SOC scale
(SOC10) were significant factors of burnout. Two-way analysis of variance
revealed that working hours was a significant variable for the MBI-emotional
exhaustion score and SOC10 in the third and fifteenth months, respectively.
Regarding the MBI-cynicism and professional efficacy scores, the SOC10 was a
significant variable in both the third and fifteenth months. In addition, the
high SOC group (SOC10 > 45) showed higher personal efficacy under longer working 
hours.
CONCLUSION: About half of the Japanese residents were judged as having burnout as
early as the third month of training under regulations of working 40 h per week. 
Individual stress coping ability and working hours were found to be significant
factors for burnout. Residents with high stress coping ability exhibited more
personal efficacy with more working experiences, which suggests that the SOC
scale could be a valuable tool to help foster a suitable training environment.

DOI: 10.1186/s12909-020-02134-0 
PMCID: PMC7359507
PMID: 32660575  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Gac Sanit. 2021 Jul-Aug;35(4):333-338. doi: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2020.04.012. Epub
2020 Jul 7.

[Community health assets mapping in a slum in Medellin (Colombia)].

[Article in Spanish]

Molina-Betancur JC(1), Agudelo-Suárez AA(2), Martínez-Herrera E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Línea de Investigación en Epidemiología y Salud Urbana, Grupo de Epidemiología
de la Facultad Nacional de Salud Pública, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín,
Colombia. Electronic address: juancamilomolina@gmail.com.
(2)Facultad de Odontología, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia.
(3)Línea de Investigación en Epidemiología y Salud Urbana, Grupo de Epidemiología
de la Facultad Nacional de Salud Pública, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín,
Colombia.

OBJECTIVE: To describe how the community from El Faro neighborhood identifies its
community assets, uses them to face life's challenges through the capacity of
collective agency; and by generating community development processes, applying
the salutogenic theory that considers people as active subjects, with the
capacity to conserve and generate health and well-being, through the use of their
own resources called health assets.
METHODS: A map of community assets was made in 2018 in el Faro neighborhood, an
informal settlement of Medellín, Colombia, following the phases recommended by
other authors and from a qualitative, participatory approach that delves into the
health situation of the community.
RESULTS: In this process were identified 12 individual community assets, 12
collective, 13 institutional and 10 in the environment. The main community asset 
among the 47 described was community participation, from the agency capacity,
mainly of its leaders who participating in their own organizations encourage
development, identity construction and well-being.
CONCLUSION: Asset mapping has served to identify intangible assets for the
community and, in turn, this recognition has been useful in strengthening the
agency's capacity for community development. This is a territory transformed by
community reflection processes allowing to understand situations of exclusion and
poverty, seeking to create a more livable place and developing a community
capacity to solve their own problems, through solidarity and community support.

Copyright © 2020 SESPAS. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2020.04.012 
PMID: 32651056 


330. J Educ Health Promot. 2020 May 28;9:117. doi: 10.4103/jehp.jehp_653_19.
eCollection 2020.

Effect of the combination of Benson's relaxation technique and brief
psychoeducational intervention on religious coping, sense of coherence, and
quality of life of family caregivers.

Mowla F(1), Khanjari S(2), Haghani S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Vice-Chancellor's Office in Treatment Affairs, Shahid Beheshti University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Nursing Care Research Center, Department of Pediatric Nursing, School of
Nursing and Midwifery, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Nursing Care Research Center, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic diseases leave a huge impact on the life of children and
their family caregivers (FCGs). Therefore, the present study was conducted to
determine the effect of the combination of Benson's relaxation technique (BRT)
and brief psycho-educational intervention (BPI) on religious coping (RCOPE),
sense of coherence (SOC), and quality of life (QoL) of FCGs in children with
chronic disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study population, consisted of 100 FCGs whose children
were afflicted by chronic diseases, and participated in the current
quasi-experimental pretest posttest design. The children were recruited from two 
state pediatric hospitals in Tehran, Iran. The RCOPE, SOC, and QoL of FCGs were
assessed twice, through pretest (T1) and posttest (T2), four weeks after the
intervention, by means of RCOPE, SOC and SF-36 questionnaires. The FCGs
participated in four training sessions lasting up to 70 min over one week,
followed by four more weeks of training. The Chi-square, Fisher's exact tests,
independent t-test, and paired t-test were performed.
RESULTS: Positive RCOPE had a significant rise at T2 (P = 0.020) compared with
negative RCOPE that did not show significant changes in T2. SOC scores for the
intervention group remarkably rose at T2 (P = 0.022); but, for the control group,
the drop was marginal. The QoL scores of both physical and mental components were
statistically significant in the intervention group at T2 (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Findings of the present study suggest that BRT and BPI can help
significantly improve the RCOPE, SOC, and QoL of families with children suffering
from chronic diseases. Measures that could enhance the RCOPE, SOC, and QoL
include low-cost interventions, good safety, and decent outcome.

Copyright: © 2020 Journal of Education and Health Promotion.

DOI: 10.4103/jehp.jehp_653_19 
PMCID: PMC7325782
PMID: 32642473 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


331. Nurs Res Pract. 2020 Jun 19;2020:8194389. doi: 10.1155/2020/8194389. eCollection 
2020.

First-Time Mothers' Enjoyment of Breastfeeding Correlates with Duration of
Breastfeeding, Sense of Coherence, and Parental Couple and Child Relation: A
Longitudinal Swedish Cohort Study.

Granberg A(1), Ekström-Bergström A(2), Bäckström C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Psykologiteamet, Göteborg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, University West, Trollhättan, Sweden.
(3)School of Health Sciences, University of Skövde, Post Box 408, S 541 28,
Skövde, Sweden.

Objectives: Many women do not reach their own breastfeeding goals regarding
duration of breastfeeding. Different factors influence breastfeeding, and to
learn more about breastfeeding within a multidimensional and longitudinal
perspective, further research is needed. Therefore, the aim of the present study 
was to investigate diverse factors correlated with first-time mothers' enjoyment 
of breastfeeding and breastfeeding duration, between childbirth and two years
after birth.
Methods: In a prospective longitudinal cohort study, 324 newly become mothers
were followed. The Spearman correlation test was used to investigate factors
correlated with the degree to which mothers enjoy breastfeeding and the duration 
of breastfeeding. The Mann-Whitney test was conducted for comparisons of
demographic characteristics between mothers who did or did not breastfeed.
Results: Among the mothers, 99.2% initiated breastfeeding after birth.
Frequencies of breastfeeding were 54.8% at six months, 9.1% at one year, and 1.0%
at two years. The degree to which the mother enjoyed breastfeeding was correlated
positively with (1) the duration of breastfeeding, (2) more positive feelings for
and relation to the child, (3) the partner's perceived relation to the child, (4)
a higher sense of coherence, and (5) stronger perceived parental couple's
relationship. Longer breastfeeding duration was correlated positively with (1) a 
higher degree of enjoyment of breastfeeding, (2) more positive relation to the
child, and (3) stronger perceived parental couple's relationship. Additionally,
breastfeeding during the first two hours after birth, more positive feelings for 
and relation to the child, and a higher degree of enjoyment of breastfeeding were
more frequently reported among breastfeeding mothers, in comparison with not
breastfeeding mothers.
Conclusion: Mothers' subjective experience from breastfeeding, sense of
coherence, and couple relationship with partner and relationship with the child
are valuable factors in regard to breastfeeding.

Copyright © 2020 Agnes Granberg et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/8194389 
PMCID: PMC7321520
PMID: 32637175 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.


332. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Jul 2;17(13). pii: E4776. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17134776.

Bullying Experience among Adolescents with a Turkish Migration Background in
Germany: Ethnic Class Composition, Integration, and Religiosity as Protective
Factors?

Demmrich S(1), Akgül S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cluster of Excellence 'Religion & Politics', Chair of Sociology of Religion,
University of Muenster, 48143 Münster, Germany.
(2)Centre of Clinical Psychology and Rehabilitation (ZKPR), University of Bremen,
28359 Bremen, Germany.

Bullying is a worldwide problem that has serious effects on the mental health of 
both victims and perpetrators. Although bullying seems related to increasing
globalization and migration, it has seldom been researched in this context. This 
exploratory study examined bullying experiences and related depressive symptoms
among a sample of adolescents with a Turkish migration background in a German
school context (N = 103, 56.7% female, MAge = 16.17, SDAge = 1.36). The study
focuses on three migration-related variables as potentially salutogenic factors: 
Ethnic class composition, acculturation, and religiosity. While the ethnic class 
composition did not show any effect, an integration acculturation strategy and
religiosity proved to be protective factors against bullying experience. The
negative prediction of integration on depressive symptoms was not consistent
throughout the multivariate analyses. The results are discussed against the
background of new impulses for bullying intervention programs for this vulnerable
group of adolescents from a Turkish migration background.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17134776 
PMCID: PMC7369874
PMID: 32630800  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Integr Cancer Ther. 2020 Jan-Dec;19:1534735420935618. doi:
10.1177/1534735420935618.

Impact of a Multimodal and Combination Therapy on Self-Regulation and Internal
Coherence in German Breast Cancer Survivors With Chronic Cancer-Related Fatigue: 
A Mixed-Method Comprehensive Cohort Design Study.

Mehl A(1), Reif M(2), Zerm R(1)(3), Pranga D(1), Friemel D(3), Berger B(4),
Brinkhaus B(5), Gutenbrunner C(6), Büssing A(4), Kröz M(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute Havelhöhe, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Society for Clinical Research, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Havelhöhe Hospital, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Witten/Herdecke University, Witten, Germany.
(5)Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

Background: Recent studies have proved the relevance of salutogenetic variables
for fatigue management in breast cancer survivors with cancer-related fatigue
(CRF). This comprehensive cohort design study is the first to examine the impact 
of 2 multimodal therapies, multimodal therapy (MT) and combined therapy (CT),
compared with standard aerobic training (AT) on salutogenetic variables
(self-regulation and internal coherence) and distress in breast cancer survivors 
with CRF. Methods: A total of 105 patients started the therapies and n = 84
completed the Self-regulation Scale, the Internal Coherence Scale, the Cancer
Fatigue Scale, and the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale at baseline, 10
weeks after treatment (T1) and n = 81 after 6 months (T2). Patient satisfaction
and qualitative feedback regarding therapy quality was assessed at T1. A general 
linear model including allocation type, therapy arm (MT/CT/AT), and
bias-adjusting propensity scores tested the superiority of both multimodal
therapies versus AT for all questionnaires at T1 and T2. Results: MT and CT were 
superior to AT to improve self-regulation and patients' satisfaction at T1.
Additionally, CT showed superiority for self-regulation at T2 (all P < .05).
Compared with AT, internal coherence was significantly higher for patients in the
MT arms at T2, respectively (all P < .01). Pearson's correlations between
self-regulation, internal coherence, and CRF improved from baseline to T2 (Mean r
= -0.60). Qualitative feedback confirmed patients' benefits in several
health-related categories. Conclusions: Self-regulation and internal coherence
are manipulable variables with relevant CRF associations. They can be positively 
affected by multimodal therapies. Alongside patients' satisfaction and
qualitative feedback they help refine treatment.

DOI: 10.1177/1534735420935618 
PMCID: PMC7491213
PMID: 32618207 


334. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 2021 Mar;133(5-6):173-181. doi: 10.1007/s00508-020-01704-y.
Epub 2020 Jul 2.

Impact of sense of coherence on quality of life in patients with multiple
sclerosis.

Štern B(1)(2), Zaletel-Kragelj L(3), Hojs Fabjan T(1).

Author information: 
(1)University Medical Centre Maribor, Department of Neurologic Diseases, Maribor,
Slovenia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Vrazov trg 2, Ljubljana,
Slovenia.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Public Health Centre, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana,
Slovenia. lijana.kragelj@mf.uni-lj.si.

AIM: Aiming at finding an effective way of empowering patients with multiple
sclerosis (MS) to cope with their disease, the objective of the study was to
explore the impact of sense of coherence (SOC) on their health-related quality of
life (HRQoL).
METHODS: A total of 134/150 eligible MS patients followed-up at the Department of
Neurology of the University Medical Centre Maribor, Slovenia, completed
a multiple sclerosis quality of life 54 questionnaire (MSQoL-54) for assessment
of HRQoL, and SOC-13-item questionnaire for assessment of SOC in 2013. Multiple
linear regression was used to analyze the association between the SOC score and
mental and physical subscores of MSQoL-54 adjusted to disease-related and
sociodemographic characteristics as potential confounders.
RESULTS: In a univariate analysis SOC score proved to be the strongest predictor 
of mental subscore of MSQoL-54 (b = 0.834; p < 0.001) explaining 35.6% of its
variance. When adjusted for confounders, it retained its position as the most
important predictor (b = 0.758; p < 0.001). On the other hand, SOC score was a
slightly less important predictor of physical subscore of MSQoL-54, being the
fourth strongest factor (b = 0.582; p < 0.001) in univariate analysis explaining 
19.1% of the variance; however, when adjusted for confounders, its importance
slightly increased by becoming the third most important predictor (b = 0.508;
p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Based on the results of the present study, we can propose SOC as an
important and suitable intervention targeted outcome to consider in managing both
aspects of MS difficulties.

DOI: 10.1007/s00508-020-01704-y 
PMID: 32617708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Int J Qual Stud Health Well-being. 2020 Dec;15(1):1783064. doi:
10.1080/17482631.2020.1783064.

Mental health as perceived by Norwegian adolescents living with parental somatic 
illness: Living in an earthquake zone.

Eide T(1), Faugli A(2), Kufås E(2), Mjøsund NH(2), Eilertsen G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health, Social and Welfare Studies, Faculty of Health and Social
Sciences, University of South-Eastern Norway , Drammen, Norway.
(2)Division of Mental Health and Addiction, Vestre Viken Hospital Trust ,
Drammen, Norway.
(3)Department of Nursing and Health Sciences, Faculty of Health and Social
Sciences, University of South-Eastern Norway , Drammen, Norway.

PURPOSE: Severe parental somatic illnesses can influence the entire family,
including adolescents' everyday life, psychosocial functioning and health. Within
salutogenesis, it is highlighted that stressor life events, such as parental
somatic illness, might lead to a chain of events that can produce tension. There 
is a lack of in-depth understanding regarding how adolescents living in a
situation with a severely somatically ill parent (SIP) perceive their own mental 
health. The aim of this study was therefore to explore the lived experience of
Norwegian adolescents living with an SIP, and their perception of the parental
illness' influence on their mental health.
METHODS: Interpretative phenomenological analysis was used. In-depth interviews
were conducted with 11 adolescents (aged 13-18 years) who had an SIP. Two
adolescents with an SIP participated in study preparation and data analysis.
RESULTS: Adolescents perceived parental somatic illness as a multifaceted
influence on their mental health as it represented both personal and relational
strain and growth. Their perceptions can be conceptualized by the super-ordinate 
theme "living in an earthquake zone", and by two themes, "inner shakes-but not
falling apart" and "relational aftershocks-gains and losses".
CONCLUSION: For adolescents, parental somatic illness means personal and
relational strain and growth.

DOI: 10.1080/17482631.2020.1783064 
PMCID: PMC7482674
PMID: 32597347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Pediatr Urol. 2020 Aug;16(4):482-486. doi: 10.1016/j.jpurol.2020.05.014. Epub
2020 May 19.

Burnout amongst members of the French-speaking Society of Pediatric and
Adolescent Urology (SFUPA). Are there specific risk factors?

Harper L(1), Alshammari D(2), Ferdynus C(3), Kalfa N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Service de Chirurgie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Pellegrin-Enfants, CHU de Bordeaux, 
France; Société Francophone d'Urologie Pédiatrique et de l'Adolescent (SFUPA),
France. Electronic address: harper_luke@hotmail.com.
(2)Service de Chirurgie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Pellegrin-Enfants, CHU de Bordeaux, 
France.
(3)Unité de Soutien Méthodologique, Hôpital Bellepierre, CHU de La Réunion,
France.
(4)Service de Chirurgie et Urologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Lapeyronie, CHU de
Montpellier, Université de Montpellier, France; Société Francophone d'Urologie
Pédiatrique et de l'Adolescent (SFUPA), France.

BACKGROUND: Burnout, which includes emotional fatigue, cynicism and low personal 
accomplishment is linked to poor job satisfaction, decreased empathy, job
withdrawal, increased absenteeism and increased medical errors, and is present
among pediatric urologists.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to determine the incidence of burnout among the members of
the French-speaking Society of Pediatric and Adolescent Urology (SFUPA) and
determine which external factors, such as marital or familial status, gender,
age, type of practice or religious belief, impacted burnout rates.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: We sent all members of the French-speaking Society for
Pediatric and Adolescent Urology (SFUPA) an anonymous online questionnaire
containing the validated French version of the 22-item Maslach Burnout Inventory 
- Human Services Survey (MBIHSS). The questionnaire comprised further questions
on age, gender, marital status, presence of children at home, type of practice,
professional status (trainee, consultant, or academic position), spirituality and
whether responders believed they presented signs of burnout.
RESULTS: 70 out of 94 members of the SFUPA answered the questionnaire (response
rate 74%). The number of responders who presented high scores in one, two or the 
three domains of the questionnaire were respectively 48.6% (IC 95%: 36-61%),
21.4% (IC 95%: 12.5-33%) and 8.6% (IC 95%: 3-18%). 34.6% of responders who
believed they presented no signs of burnout actually did have a high burnout
score in at least one domain. There was no significant association between age,
gender, having children or being a trainee and the presence of burnout. However, 
marital status and workplace were significantly associated with presence of signs
of burnout.
DISCUSSION: Burnout is a distinct type of work-related stress - a state of
physical or emotional exhaustion that also involves a sense of reduced
accomplishment and loss of personal identity. In our study the most significant
factor was working in Academic hospitals which can be associated with
administrative workload, long hours and a lack of institutional resources. Being 
in a couple was also associated with less burnout, thus showing the importance of
healthy relationships and sharing on burnout rate. Age, however was not
associated significantly with burnout nor was gender, which is in coherence with 
previous findings.
CONCLUSION: Amongst members of the French-speaking Society of Pediatric and
Adolescent Urology, nearly half presented signs of burnout, especially those
working in academic hospitals. Marital status also influenced burnout rates.
Scientific societies should work on developing tools to identify and accompany
affected individuals.

Copyright © 2020 Journal of Pediatric Urology Company. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpurol.2020.05.014 
PMID: 32591316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarartion of competing interest None.


337. BMC Psychiatry. 2020 Jun 25;20(1):335. doi: 10.1186/s12888-020-02704-y.

Correlates of mental health in occupations at risk for traumatization: a
cross-sectional study.

Schäfer SK(1), Sopp MR(1), Staginnus M(1), Lass-Hennemann J(1), Michael T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Saarland University, Building A1 3, 66123,
Saarbruecken, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychology, Saarland University, Building A1 3, 66123,
Saarbruecken, Germany. t.michael@mx.uni-saarland.de.

BACKGROUND: Hospitals, police stations, and fire departments are highly demanding
workplaces. Staff members are regularly exposed to various stressors including
traumatic events. Correspondingly, several studies report high rates of mental
health issues among these occupations. Nevertheless, despite these challenging
circumstances, some staff members manage to sustain their mental health. The
current study is the first to investigate three health-promoting factors
simultaneously among three different, highly demanding occupations.
METHODS: The present cross-sectional survey investigated health-promoting factors
(sense of coherence - SOC, trait-resilience, locus of control - LOC) and mental
health outcomes (general psychopathological symptom burden, posttraumatic stress,
burnout) in medical staff (n = 223), police officers (n = 257), and firefighters 
(n = 100).
RESULTS: Among all occupations, SOC, trait-resilience, and an internal LOC were
negatively associated with general psychopathological symptoms, posttraumatic
stress, and burnout symptoms. By contrast, all these outcome measures were
positively correlated with an external LOC. Multiple regression models including 
all health-promoting factors explained 56% of the variance in general
psychopathological symptoms and 27% in posttraumatic stress symptoms. Among all
occupations, SOC was the strongest predictor of both general psychopathological
symptom burden and posttraumatic stress symptoms. Multigroup path analyses
revealed minor differences across occupations, mainly driven by a stronger
influence of LOC in police officers.
CONCLUSION: Across all occupations, SOC was identified as the most important
health-promoting factor. Future longitudinal studies should further examine the
causal link between health-promoting factors and mental distress in different
workplaces. Such studies will also allow for further development and evaluation
of resilience promoting programs.

DOI: 10.1186/s12888-020-02704-y 
PMCID: PMC7318450
PMID: 32586338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Front Psychiatry. 2020 May 28;11:475. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00475. eCollection 
2020.

Predictors of Asylum Seekers' Health Care Utilization in the Early Phase of
Resettlement.

Kindermann D(1), Zeyher V(1), Nagy E(1), Friederich HC(1), Bozorgmehr K(2)(3),
Nikendei C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Internal Medicine and Psychosomatics, University of
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Department of General Practice and Health Services Research, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Population Medicine and Health Services Research, School of
Public Health, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany.

Background: Asylum seekers display high prevalence rates of posttraumatic stress 
disorder, depression, anxiety, and panic disorder due to pre-, peri-, and
post-migration stressors. In contrast to the high mental health burden, health
care utilization among asylum seekers in the early phase of resettlement is low. 
However, the early stages after migration are a particularly vulnerable phase in 
which psychosocial support measures are needed to prevent mental disorders from
becoming chronic.
Objective: To identify predictors of asylum seekers' health care utilization in
the early stages of resettlement.
Methods: Using hierarchical logistic regression analysis, the variance
explanation of the (1) general utilization of health care services as well as the
individual utilization of (2) outpatient psychiatrists, (3) counselling centers, 
and (4) general practitioners was analyzed in n = 65 asylum seekers. A structured
interview on health care utilization took place between three to five months
after assessment of possible predictors. We defined the following three groups of
predictors a) the sociodemographic variables gender, age, number of children,
religion, language proficiency, b) the psychological variables sense of coherence
and emotion regulation as well as c) the asylum seekers' psychiatric diagnoses.
Results: Individual sociodemographic factors, such as gender, age, and number of 
children as well as the emotion regulation strategy of expressive suppression and
sense of coherence were shown to be predictive for the utilization of health care
services among asylum seekers.
Conclusions: Low-threshold, culture-sensitive treatment offers for asylum seekers
should be established in the early phase after migration. General practitioners
should be a central hub for further referrals to disorder-specific treatments.

Copyright © 2020 Kindermann, Zeyher, Nagy, Friederich, Bozorgmehr and Nikendei.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00475 
PMCID: PMC7295117
PMID: 32581865 


339. NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes. 2020 Jun 24;6(1):25. doi: 10.1038/s41522-020-0135-0.

Streptococcus mutans adhesion force sensing in multi-species oral biofilms.

Wang C(1), van der Mei HC(2), Busscher HJ(3), Ren Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, W.J. Kolff Institute, University of Groningen and 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, W.J. Kolff Institute, University of
Groningen and University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
h.c.van.der.mei@umcg.nl.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, W.J. Kolff Institute, University of
Groningen and University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Bacteria utilize chemical and mechanical mechanisms to sense their environment,
to survive hostile conditions. In mechanical sensing, intra-bilayer pressure
profiles change due to deformation induced by the adhesion forces bacteria
experience on a surface. Emergent properties in mono-species Streptococcus mutans
biofilms, such as extracellular matrix production, depend on the adhesion forces 
that streptococci sense. Here we determined whether and how salivary-conditioning
film (SCF) adsorption and the multi-species nature of oral biofilm influence
adhesion force sensing and associated gene expression by S. mutans. Hereto,
Streptococcus oralis, Actinomyces naeslundii, and S. mutans were grown together
on different surfaces in the absence and presence of an adsorbed SCF. Atomic
force microscopy and RT-qPCR were used to measure S. mutans adhesion forces and
gene expressions. Upon SCF adsorption, stationary adhesion forces decreased on a 
hydrophobic and increased on a hydrophilic surface to around 8 nN. Optical
coherence tomography showed that triple-species biofilms on SCF-coated surfaces
with dead S. oralis adhered weakly and often detached as a contiguous sheet.
Concurrently, S. mutans displayed no differential adhesion force sensing on
SCF-coated surfaces in the triple-species biofilms with dead S. oralis, but once 
live S. oralis were present S. mutans adhesion force sensing and gene expression 
ranked similar as on surfaces in the absence of an adsorbed SCF. Concluding, live
S. oralis may enzymatically degrade SCF components to facilitate direct contact
of biofilm inhabitants with surfaces and allow S. mutans adhesion force sensing
of underlying surfaces to define its appropriate adaptive response. This
represents a new function of initial colonizers in multi-species oral biofilms.

DOI: 10.1038/s41522-020-0135-0 
PMCID: PMC7314845
PMID: 32581220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


340. PLoS One. 2020 Jun 23;15(6):e0234997. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0234997.
eCollection 2020.

Longitudinal prediction of positive and negative mental health in Germany,
Russia, and China.

Margraf J(1), Zhang XC(1), Lavallee KL(1), Schneider S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mental Health Research and Treatment Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, 
Germany.

The present study examines a broad range of longitudinal predictors of
dimensional positive mental health (PMH) and negative mental health (NMH), using 
data from the BOOM study. Participants were drawn from university student samples
in Germany (1,608), Russia (677) and China (12,057). A structural equation model 
was conducted with four groups of predictors and PMH/NMH as criteria (outcomes). 
Five of the six salutogenic predictors were predictive of both positive mental
health (positively) and negative mental health, as measured by depression
(negatively). Pathogenic predictors anxiety and depression were related to future
depression, but not to positive mental health. Stress at baseline was related to 
both future positive mental health (negatively) and future depression
(positively). Being male in this study was associated with increased future
depression. Results hold across Germany, Russia, and China. Results support the
conceptualization of positive and negative mental health as related, but
independent dimensions across three cultures.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0234997 
PMCID: PMC7310683
PMID: 32574202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


341. HERD. 2020 Oct;13(4):210-224. doi: 10.1177/1937586720933176. Epub 2020 Jun 22.

Indigenous Ecohumanist Architecture for Health in Canada's Far North.

Verderber S(1)(2), Wolf JP(3), Skouris E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Design + Health Innovation, John H. Daniels Faculty of
Architecture, Landscape, and Design, 152805University of Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(2)Dalla Lana School of Public Health/IHPME, 7938University of Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(3)LGA Architectural Partners, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)KPMB Architects, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Circumpolar nations are experiencing unprecedented environmental and 
public health policy challenges due to global climate change, exploitation of
nonrenewable natural resources, the endangerment of myriad wildlife species, and 
growing sovereignty disputes. In a call to action, the Arctic states' health
ministers recently signed a declaration identifying shared priorities for mutual 
international cooperation. Among agreed-upon collaborations, an enhancement of
intercultural understanding and promotion of culturally appropriate healthcare
delivery systems is to be of high priority going forward.
PURPOSE AND AIM: In far north Canada, health policies perpetuated for generations
upon indigenous communities have, traditionally, often had adverse consequences
for the medically underserved inhabitants of these communities. This discussion
addresses the cultural disconnect between the colonial era and current
indigenous, decolonialist health and healing design strategies.
METHOD AND RESULT: In response, two architectural design case studies are
presented that synthesize ecological site planning precepts with salutogenic
architectural design attributes-a behavioral health and substance abuse
residential treatment center and three elderhousing prototypes for construction
in Canada's Northwest Territories.
CONCLUSION: This conceptual synthesis is practicable, transferable, and adaptable
to varied, extreme climatic conditions, as reflective of best practices in the
delivery of healthcare facilities that express a synthesis of ecohumanist and
salutogenic values and methodologies. The discussion concludes with a call for
empathic, evidence-based collaboration and research that further examines the
blending together of prefabricated off-site construction with on-site
construction approaches.

DOI: 10.1177/1937586720933176 
PMID: 32567397 


342. Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep. 2020 Jun 8;19:100776. doi: 10.1016/j.ajoc.2020.100776. 
eCollection 2020 Sep.

Swept source optical coherence tomography findings in a severe traumatic
maculopathy following firework ocular injury.

Vicini G(1), Nicolosi C(1), Bacherini D(1), Sodi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eye Clinic, Neuromuscolar and Sense Organs Department, Careggi University
Hospital, Largo Brambilla, 3, 50134, Florence, Italy.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajoc.2020.100776 
PMCID: PMC7298391
PMID: 32566801 

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors have any financial
disclosures.


343. Eur J Oncol Nurs. 2020 Aug;47:101778. doi: 10.1016/j.ejon.2020.101778. Epub 2020 
Jun 12.

Between a rock and a hard place: Registered nurses' accounts of their work
situation in cancer care in Swedish acute care hospitals.

Smeds Alenius L(1), Lindqvist R(2), Ball JE(3), Sharp L(4), Lindqvist O(5),
Tishelman C(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Innovative Care Research, Department of Learning, Informatics,
Management and Ethics, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden. Electronic address:
lisa.smeds@ki.se.
(2)Division of Innovative Care Research, Department of Learning, Informatics,
Management and Ethics, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden; Stockholm Health Care
Services (SLSO), Region Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address:
rikard.lindqvist@ki.se.
(3)Division of Innovative Care Research, Department of Learning, Informatics,
Management and Ethics, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden; School of Health Sciences, 
University of Southampton, England, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
jane.ball@soton.ac.uk.
(4)Division of Innovative Care Research, Department of Learning, Informatics,
Management and Ethics, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden; Regionalt Cancer Centrum
(RCC) Stockholm-Gotland, Sweden. Electronic address: lena.sharp@sll.se.
(5)Division of Innovative Care Research, Department of Learning, Informatics,
Management and Ethics, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden; Department of Nursing, Umeå
University, Sweden.
(6)Division of Innovative Care Research, Department of Learning, Informatics,
Management and Ethics, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden; Stockholm Health Care
Services (SLSO), Region Stockholm, Sweden; School of Health Sciences, University 
of Southampton, England, United Kingdom; The Center for Rural Medicine, Storuman,
Sweden. Electronic address: carol.tishelman@ki.se.

PURPOSE: Hospital organizational features related to registered nurses' (RNs')
practice environment are often studied using quantitative measures. These are
however unable to capture nuances of experiences of the practice environment from
the perspective of individual RNs. The aim of this study is therefore to
investigate individual RNs' experiences of their work situation in cancer care in
Swedish acute care hospitals.
METHODS: This study is based on a qualitative framework analysis of data derived 
from an open-ended question by 200 RNs working in specialized or general cancer
care hospital units, who responded to the Swedish RN4CAST survey on nurse work
environment. Antonovsky's salutogenic concepts "meaningfulness",
"comprehensibility", and "manageability" were applied post-analysis to support
interpretation of results.
RESULTS: RNs describe a tension between expectations to uphold safe, high quality
care, and working in an environment where they are unable to influence conditions
for care delivery. A lacking sense of agency, on individual and collective
levels, points to organizational factors impeding RNs' use of their competence in
clinical decision-making and in governing practice within their professional
scope.
CONCLUSIONS: RNs in this study appear to experience work situations which, while 
often described as meaningful, generally appear neither comprehensible nor
manageable. The lack of an individual and collective sense of agency found here
could potentially erode RNs' sense of meaningfulness and readiness to invest in
their work.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejon.2020.101778 
PMID: 32563048  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
have no conflicts of interest to disclose.


344. NPJ Prim Care Respir Med. 2020 Jun 18;30(1):27. doi: 10.1038/s41533-020-0183-1.

Associations of sense of coherence and self-efficacy with health status and
disease severity in COPD.

Tsiligianni I(1), Sifaki-Pistolla D(2)(3), Gergianaki I(2), Kampouraki M(4),
Papadokostakis P(5), Poulonirakis I(6), Gialamas I(7), Bempi V(8), Ierodiakonou
D(2)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Health Planning Unit, Department of Social Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Crete, Herkalion, Crete, Greece. i.tsiligianni@uoc.gr.
(2)Health Planning Unit, Department of Social Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Crete, Herkalion, Crete, Greece.
(3)Clinic of Social and Family Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Crete, Crete, Greece.
(4)Moires Health Care Center, Herkalion, Crete, Greece.
(5)Primary Care Practice, Garipa, Herkalion, Crete, Greece.
(6)Primary Care Practice, Health Center of Agia Varvara, Heraklion, Crete,
Greece.
(7)Primary Care Practice, Health Center of Sitia, Sitia General Hospital,
Lasithi, Crete, Greece.
(8)Heraklion University Hospital, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

Sense of coherence and self-efficacy has been found to affect health-related
quality of life in chronic diseases. However, research on respiratory diseases is
limited. Here we report findings on quality of life (QoL) of COPD patients and
the associations with coherence and self-efficacy. This study consists of the
Greek national branch of the UNLOCK study, with a sample of 257 COPD patients.
Coherence and self-efficacy are positively inter-correlated (Pearson rho = 0.590,
p < 0.001). They are negatively correlated with the quality of life (CAT)
[Pearson rho: coherence = -0.29, p < 0.001; self-efficacy = -0.29, p < 0.001) and
mMRC (coherence = -0.37, p < 0.001; self-efficacy rho = -0.32, p < 0.001)].
Coherence is inversely associated with (Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive
Lung Disease) GOLD 2018-CAT and GOLD 2018-mMRC classification and "having at
least one exacerbation in the past year". Findings are stressing the need for
their incorporation in primary health care and COPD guidance as it maybe that
enhancing coherence and self-efficacy will improve QoL.

DOI: 10.1038/s41533-020-0183-1 
PMCID: PMC7303183
PMID: 32555199  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Am J Speech Lang Pathol. 2021 Feb 11;30(1S):359-375. doi:
10.1044/2020_AJSLP-19-00104. Epub 2020 Jun 18.

Measuring Global Coherence in People With Aphasia During Unstructured
Conversation.

Leaman MC(1), Edmonds LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biobehavioral Sciences, Teachers College, Columbia University,
New York, NY.

Purpose Global coherence is an essential macrolinguistic discourse skill that
speakers use to formulate discourse to convey meaning with maintenance to a
topic. When global coherence is poor, the listener's ability to understand how
the discourse makes sense as a whole is diminished. Measures exist to evaluate
global coherence in people with aphasia during monologue tasks (e.g., picture
description). The aim of the current research is to develop such a measure for
unstructured conversation and to explore how global coherence is impacted by
aphasia during conversation. A global coherence measure for conversation is
required because markedly different cognitive and linguistic demands are made for
production of different types of discourse. Thus, a structured monologue measure 
cannot be used with validity for unstructured conversation. To adequately
evaluate global coherence during conversation, a measure specific to the demands 
of conversation is required. Method We adapted the 4-point Global Coherence Scale
(Wright & Capilouto, 2012; Wright et al., 2013), a monologue-level measure of
global coherence to conversation, resulting in the 4-point Global Coherence Scale
in unstructured conversation (GCSconv). We conducted statistical evaluation of
the reliability/stability of the 4-point GCSconv in 18 unstructured conversations
held by nine people with aphasia. Utterances with low global coherence scores
were classified following a recent methodology to describe how breakdown in these
utterances contributed to diminished global coherence (Hazamy & Obermeyer, 2019).
Results The 4-point GCSconv demonstrated excellent inter/intrarater reliability
and test-retest stability. Nonspecific language and off-topic comments
contributed most frequently to lowered global coherence. Conclusions Findings
suggest the 4-point GCSconv may be a feasible and reliable measure of global
coherence in conversation. This measure adds to a core of emerging reliable
discourse measures for conversation. As such, it has potential to inform
assessment and treatment of everyday conversation and to investigate the
relationship of global coherence in structured monologue and unstructured
conversation. Supplemental Material https://doi.org/10.23641/asha.12469187.

DOI: 10.1044/2020_AJSLP-19-00104 
PMID: 32551917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Int J Adolesc Med Health. 2020 Jun 8;33(3):245-251. doi: 10.1515/ijamh-2018-0296.

App-based tracking of smartphone use and its association with perceived stress
and sense of coherence among undergraduate medical students in Southern India.

Jeyashree K(1), Sathiavadivu JS(1), Suliankatchi A(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Medicine, Velammal Medical College Hospital and
Research Institute, Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India.
(2)Department of Statistics, Manonmaniam Sundaranar University, Abishekapatti,
Tirunelveli, Tamil Nadu, 627012, India.
(3)ICMR-National Institute of Epidemiology, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.

OBJECTIVES: Smartphone use, now a ubiquitous habit among the youth and
psychological stress are interestingly juxtaposed. Sense of coherence (SOC) is
the ability to comprehend a stressful situation and tackle it positively. This
study measured the pattern of smartphone use, perceived stress, SOC and the
inter-relationship between them among undergraduate medical students.
METHODS: Perceived Stress Scale (PSS-10) and SOC-13 scales were used to measure
perceived stress and SOC, respectively in 163 medical college students. 'App
Usage', a mobile application was used to objectively record smartphone usage.
RESULTS: Nearly two-thirds (64.4%) were female students. The mean (SD) SOC score 
was 48.7 (11.1) and the mean (SD) PSS score was 20.7 (6.2). SOC was inversely
correlated (r=-0.662, p<0.001) with PSS. The median (IQR) duration of smartphone 
use was 3.4(1.8, 4.8) hours per day which was not significantly correlated with
perceived stress (rho=0.12, p=0.26). Linear regression showed that male students 
used smartphones for a longer duration than females (p=0.0008), after controlling
for confounders.
CONCLUSIONS: Medical college students use smartphones for an average of 3 to 4 h 
a day. Students with a better sense of coherence perceive less stress.
Initiatives to improve the sense of coherence will help increase their resilience
and reduce susceptibility to problematic use of smartphones.

© 2020 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/ijamh-2018-0296 
PMID: 32549146 


347. Retin Cases Brief Rep. 2020 Jun 10. doi: 10.1097/ICB.0000000000001019. [Epub
ahead of print]

A surgical approach for subfoveal Densiron 68 bubble removal in a case of
recurrent inferior retinal detachment.

Savastano A(1), Nicolosi C(2), Vicini G(2), Lenzetti C(2), Rizzo S(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology Unit, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS,
Rome, Italy.
(2)Eye Clinic, Neuromuscular and Sense Organs Department, Careggi University
Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(3)Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.
(4)Consiglio Nazionale della Ricerca (CNR), Pisa, Italy.

PURPOSE: METHODS:: A 23-gauge-pars plana vitrectomy was performed to remove the
subfoveal silicone oil bubble and to treat the RD. Through a mid-peripheral
retinal tear, we reached the subfoveal space by extending the RD up to the
macular region. We inserted in the subretinal space a Charles cannula protected
with a silicone tip to catch and aspirate the bubble. Intra-operative optical
coherence tomography successfully guided the surgical maneuvers.
RESULTS: We achieved the complete removal of the bubble from the subretinal
space, and this led to the restoration of the retinal morphology with functional 
improvement, although the fovea developed an atrophy.
CONCLUSION: .

DOI: 10.1097/ICB.0000000000001019 
PMID: 32541429 


348. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Jun 10;17(11). pii: E4127. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17114127.

Sense of Coherence, Burnout, and Work Engagement: The Moderating Effect of Coping
in the Democratic Republic of Congo.

Mitonga-Monga J(1), Mayer CH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial Psychology & People Management, University of
Johannesburg, Johannesburg 2006, South Africa.

Research on coping, sense of coherence, burnout, and work engagement is well
documented in western countries. However, a void of studies exists on how coping 
mechanisms can moderate the relationship among sense of coherence, burnout, and
work engagement in a manufacturing company in the Democratic Republic of Congo
(DRC). The objective of this research was to examine the moderating effect of
coping (COP) in the relationship between sense of coherence (SOC), burnout (BO), 
and work engagement (WE). The study employed a quantitative research approach,
while participants were recruited through convenience sampling. A total of 197
employees (n = 197; females 40%) who are permanently employed in a manufacturing 
organisation in the DRC participated in the study voluntarily. The results
indicate that coping related positively to a sense of coherence. Moreover, the
results indicate that sense of coherence and work engagement related negatively
to burnout. Furthermore, the results show that coping acted as a moderator in the
relationships between variables. The study adds value to the WE theory by
suggesting that an employee who has a high level of COP, high SOC, low level of
BO, will positively engage, perform, and be productive.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17114127 
PMCID: PMC7312054
PMID: 32531877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2020 May 22;11:335. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2020.00335.
eCollection 2020.

Cumulative Risk on Oxytocin-Pathway Genes Impairs Default Mode Network
Connectivity in Trauma-Exposed Youth.

Zeev-Wolf M(1), Levy J(2)(3), Ebstein RP(4), Feldman R(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Education, Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, Ben Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(2)Interdiscilinary Center Herzliya, Baruch Ivcher School of Psychology,
Herzliya, Israel.
(3)Department of Neuroscience and Biomedical Engineering, Aalto University,
Espoo, Finland.
(4)Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore.
(5)Child Study Center, Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States.

Background: Although the default mode network (DMN) is a core network essential
for brain functioning, little is known about its developmental trajectory,
particularly on factors associated with its coherence into a functional network. 
In light of adult studies indicating DMN's susceptibility to stress-related
conditions, we examined links between variability on oxytocin-pathway genes and
DMN connectivity in youth exposed to chronic war-related trauma Methods:
Following a cohort of war-exposed children from early childhood, we imaged the
brains of 74 preadolescents (age 11-13 years; 39 war-exposed) during rest using
magnetoencephalography (MEG). A cumulative risk index on oxytocin-pathway genes
was constructed by combining single nucleotide polymorphisms on five genes
previously linked with social deficits and psychopathology; OXTR rs1042778, OXTR 
rs2254298, OXTRrs53576, CD38 rs3796863, and AVPR1A RS3. Avoidant response to
trauma reminders in early childhood and anxiety disorders in late childhood were 
assessed as predictors of disruptions to DMN theta connectivity. Results: Higher 
vulnerability on oxytocin-pathway genes predicted greater disruptions to DMN
theta connectivity. Avoidant symptoms in early childhood and generalized anxiety 
disorder in later childhood were related to impaired DMN connectivity. In
combination, stress exposure, oxytocin-pathway genes, and stress-related symptoms
explained 24.6% of the variance in DMN connectivity, highlighting the significant
effect of stress on the maturing brain. Conclusions: Findings are the first to
link the oxytocin system and maturation of the DMN, a core system sustaining
autobiographical memories, alteration of intrinsic and extrinsic attention,
mentalization, and sense of self. Results suggest that oxytocin may buffer the
effects of chronic early stress on the DMN, particularly theta rhythms that
typify the developing brain.

Copyright © 2020 Zeev-Wolf, Levy, Ebstein and Feldman.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2020.00335 
PMCID: PMC7256187
PMID: 32528417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2021 Feb 11;20(1):48-55. doi: 10.1177/1474515120930496.

Sense of coherence in adults with congenital heart disease in 15 countries:
Patient characteristics, cultural dimensions and quality of life.

Moons P(1)(2)(3)(4), Apers S(1), Kovacs AH(5)(6), Thomet C(7), Budts W(8)(9),
Enomoto J(10), Sluman MA(11)(12), Wang JK(13), Jackson JL(14), Khairy P(15), Cook
SC(16), Chidambarathanu S(17), Alday L(18), Oechslin E(5), Eriksen K(19),
Dellborg M(3)(20)(21), Berghammer M(22)(23), Johansson B(24), Mackie AS(25),
Menahem S(26), Caruana M(27), Veldtman G(28), Soufi A(29), Fernandes SM(30),
White K(31), Callus E(32)(33), Kutty S(34)(35), Luyckx K(36)(37); APPROACH-IS
consortium and the International Society for Adult Congenital Heart Disease
(ISACHD).

Author information: 
(1)KU Leuven Department of Public Health and Primary Care, KU Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Institute of Health and Care Sciences, University of Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Centre for Person-Centred Care (GPCC), University of Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Cape Town, South
Africa.
(5)Toronto Congenital Cardiac Center for Adults, University Health Network,
University of Toronto, Canada.
(6)Knight Cardiovascular Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, USA.
(7)Center for Congenital Heart Disease, Department of Cardiology, Inselspital -
Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, Switzerland.
(8)Division of Congenital and Structural Cardiology, University Hospitals Leuven,
Belgium.
(9)KU Leuven Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, KU Leuven, Belgium.
(10)Department of Education, Toyo University, Japan.
(11)Coronel Institute of Occupational Health, Amsterdam UMC, University of
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(12)Department of Cardiology, Jeroen Bosch Hospital, the Netherlands.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taiwan.
(14)Center for Biobehavioral Health, Nationwide Children's Hospital, USA.
(15)Adult Congenital Heart Center, Montreal Heart Institute, Université de
Montréal, Canada.
(16)Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center, Helen DeVos Children's Hospital, USA.
(17)Pediatric Cardiology, Frontier Lifeline Hospital (Dr. K. M. Cherian Heart
Foundation), India.
(18)Division of Cardiology, Hospital de Niños, Argentina.
(19)Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center, Oslo University Hospital -
Rikshospitalet, Norway.
(20)Adult Congenital Heart Unit, Sahlgrenska University Hospital/Östra, Sweden.
(21)Institute of Medicine, The Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg,
Sweden.
(22)Department of Health Sciences, University West, Sweden.
(23)Department of Paediatrics, Queen Silvia Children's Hospital, Sahlgrenska
University Hospital, Sweden.
(24)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå University, Sweden.
(25)Division of Cardiology, Stollery Children's Hospital, University of Alberta, 
Canada.
(26)Monash Heart, Monash Medical Centre, Monash University, Australia.
(27)Department of Cardiology, Mater Dei Hospital, Malta.
(28)Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, USA.
(29)Department of Congenital Heart Disease, Louis Pradel Hospital, Hospices
civils de Lyon, France.
(30)Adult Congenital Heart Program at Stanford, Lucile Packard Children's
Hospital and Stanford Health Care, USA.
(31)Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center, Washington University and Barnes
Jewish Heart & Vascular Center, University of Missouri, USA.
(32)Clinical Psychology Service, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, Italy.
(33)Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Italy.
(34)Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center University of Nebraska Medical
Center/Children's Hospital and Medical Center, USA.
(35)Taussig Heart Center, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, USA.
(36)KU Leuven School Psychology and Development in Context, KU Leuven, Belgium.
(37)UNIBS, University of the Free State, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have found that sense of coherence (SOC) is
positively related to quality of life (QoL) in persons with chronic conditions.
In congenital heart disease (CHD), the evidence is scant.
AIMS: We investigated (i) intercountry variation in SOC in a large international 
sample of adults with CHD; (ii) the relationship between demographic and clinical
characteristics and SOC; (iii) the relationship between cultural dimensions of
countries and SOC; and (iv) variation in relative importance of SOC in explaining
QoL across the countries.
METHODS: APPROACH-IS was a cross-sectional, observational study, with 4028
patients from 15 countries enrolled. SOC was measured using the 13-item SOC scale
(range 13-91) and QoL was assessed by a linear analog scale (range 0-100).
RESULTS: The mean SOC score was 65.5±13.2. Large intercountry variation was
observed with the strongest SOC in Switzerland (68.8±11.1) and the lowest SOC in 
Japan (59.9±14.5). A lower SOC was associated with a younger age; lower
educational level; with job seeking, being unemployed or disabled; unmarried,
divorced or widowed; from a worse functional class; and simple CHD. Power
distance index and individualism vs collectivism were cultural dimensions
significantly related to SOC. SOC was positively associated with QoL in all
participating countries and in the total sample, with an explained variance
ranging from 5.8% in Argentina to 30.4% in Japan.
CONCLUSION: In adults with CHD, SOC is positively associated with QoL. The
implementation of SOC-enhancing interventions might improve QoL, but strategies
would likely differ across countries given the substantial variation in explained
variance.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author(s) 2020. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1177/1474515120930496 
PMID: 32524857 


351. Psychol Health. 2021 Mar;36(3):253-270. doi: 10.1080/08870446.2020.1775831. Epub 
2020 Jun 11.

Effects of a brief multimodal online intervention on the intention to conduct sun
protective behaviours through targeting illness representations about skin
cancer: a randomized controlled trial.

Vollmann M(1), Engelhardt G(2), Salewski C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Socio-Medical Sciences, Erasmus School of Health Policy and
Management, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Health Psychology, Faculty of Psychology, University of Hagen,
Hagen, Germany.

Objective: The incidence of skin cancer can be reduced by increasing sun
protective behaviours. Based on the Common-Sense Model and the Intervention
Mapping approach, a brief intervention targeting illness representations about
skin cancer to increase the intention to conduct sun protective behaviours was
developed and evaluated regarding its effectiveness.Design: A randomized pre-post
control group design with 509 healthy participants (69% women, mean age
39 years).Main outcome measures: Changes in illness representations about skin
cancer (emotional representations, illness coherence, and prevention control) and
the intention to conduct sun protective behaviours, i.e. UV protection and sun
avoidance.Results: ANCOVAs showed that the intervention increased illness
coherence and perceived prevention control as well as the intention to conduct
sun protective behaviours. Mediation analyses revealed that the increase in
illness coherence and/or perceived prevention control partially mediated the
effect of the intervention on the increase of the intention to use UV protection 
(indirect effects: .02*, .06*) and to avoid sun exposure (indirect effects:
.01 ns, .04*).Conclusion: The intervention was successful in changing illness
representations and thereby increasing the intention to conduct sun protective
behaviours. The findings provide evidence for the usefulness of the Common-Sense 
Model in the context of illness prevention.

DOI: 10.1080/08870446.2020.1775831 
PMID: 32524850 


352. Rev Bras Epidemiol. 2020 Jun 5;23:e200049. doi: 10.1590/1980-549720200049.
eCollection 2020.

Psychosocial aspects and the impact of oral health on quality of life of
Brazilian adults.

[Article in English, Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the
publisher]

Ferreira DC(1), Gonçalves TR(2), Celeste RK(3), Olinto MTA(2), Pattussi MP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Prefeitura de São Leopoldo - São Leopoldo (RS), Brasil.
(2)Programa de Pós-graduação em Saúde Coletiva, Universidade do Vale do Rio dos
Sinos - São Leopoldo (RS), Brasil.
(3)Programa de Pós-graduação em Odontologia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande
do Sul - Porto Alegre (RS), Brasil.

INTRODUCTION: This research aimed to investigate the association between
psychosocial aspects and the impact of oral health on quality of life among
adults.
METHOD: This population-based cross-sectional study was conducted with 1,100
adults aged 20 years or older from a medium-sized city in Rio Grande do Sul,
Southern Brazil. The outcome was Oral Health Impact Profile (OHIP-14) in three
categories: better (OHIP=0: 50% of lower scores), moderate (OHIP 1-12.6: 25% of
intermediate scores), and worse (OHIP≥12.7: 25% of higher scores). The exposures 
included measurements of social support, resilience, sense of coherence,
spirituality, quality of life, and stress. We calculated crude and adjusted odds 
ratios and their respective 95% confidence intervals using ordinal logistic
regression.
RESULTS: After adjustment for demographic, socioeconomic, and behavioral
variables, individuals with low social support, low sense of coherence, low
quality of life, and high level of stress were, respectively, 2.16, 2.90, 2.94,
and 1.50 times more likely to report a worse impact of oral health on quality of 
life than those with favorable characteristics.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that psychosocial aspects can influence the
perceived impact of oral health on quality of life. Health policies, programs,
and services must recognize the mutual relationship between oral health
indicators and psychosocial aspects among adults.

Publisher: A pesquisa objetivou investigar a associação entre os aspectos
psicossociais e o impacto das condições bucais sobre a qualidade de vida de
adultos, escopo ainda pouco explorado em pesquisas nacionais.Um estudo
transversal de base populacional foi realizado com 1.100 adultos de 20 anos de
idade ou mais, em uma cidade de médio porte do Rio Grande do Sul. O desfecho foi 
avaliado por meio do Oral Health Impact Profile (OHIP-14) enquanto as exposições 
incluíram medidas de apoio social, resiliência, senso de coerência,
espiritualidade, qualidade de vida e estresse. Foram calculadas as razões de
chances brutas e ajustadas, bem como seus intervalos de confiança de 95%
utilizando-se regressão logística ordinal.Após o ajuste para variáveis
demográficas, socioeconômicas e comportamentais, indivíduos com baixo apoio
social, baixo senso de coerência, baixa qualidade de vida e alto nível de
estresse possuíam respectivamente 2,16; 2,90; 2,94; 1,50 vezes mais chance de
relatar um pior impacto da condição na qualidade de vida quando comparados aos
indivíduos com estas características favoráveis.Os achados sugerem que os
aspectos psicossociais podem influenciar a avaliação que as pessoas fazem do
impacto da condição bucal sobre a qualidade de vida. É importante que políticas, 
programas e serviços de saúde reconheçam a relação mútua entre os indicadores de 
saúde bucal e os aspectos psicossociais de adultos.
DOI: 10.1590/1980-549720200049 
PMID: 32520100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Clin Rehabil. 2020 Aug;34(8):1056-1071. doi: 10.1177/0269215520929737. Epub 2020 
Jun 10.

The effects of a dialogue-based intervention to promote psychosocial well-being
after stroke: a randomized controlled trial.

Bragstad LK(1)(2), Hjelle EG(1), Zucknick M(3), Sveen U(2)(4)(5), Thommessen
B(6), Bronken BA(7), Martinsen R(7), Kitzmüller G(8), Mangset M(2), Kvigne KJ(7),
Hilari K(9), Lightbody CE(10), Kirkevold M(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Habilitation and Rehabilitation Services and Models
(CHARM), Institute of Health and Society, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Oslo Centre for Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Department of Biostatistics,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Faculty of Health Sciences, Oslo Metropolitan University, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Oslo University Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway.
(6)Department of Neurology, Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway.
(7)Department of Health and Nursing Sciences, Faculty of Social and Health
Sciences, Inland Norway University of Applied Sciences, Elverum, Norway.
(8)Department of Health and Care Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, UiT, The
Arctic University of Norway, Narvik, Norway.
(9)Centre for Language and Communication Sciences Research, School of Health
Sciences, City, University of London, London, UK.
(10)School of Nursing, University of Central Lancashire, Lancashire, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of a dialogue-based intervention targeting
psychosocial well-being at 12 months post-stroke.
DESIGN: Multicenter, prospective, randomized, assessor-blinded, controlled trial 
with two parallel groups.
SETTING: Community.
SUBJECTS: Three-hundred and twenty-two adults (⩾18 years) with stroke within the 
last four weeks were randomly allocated into intervention group (n = 166) or
control group (n = 156).
INTERVENTIONS: The intervention group received a dialogue-based intervention to
promote psychosocial well-being, comprising eight individual 1-1½ hour sessions
delivered during the first six months post-stroke.
MAIN MEASURES: The primary outcome measure was the General Health
Questionnaire-28 (GHQ-28). Secondary outcome measures included the Stroke and
Aphasia Quality of Life Scale-39g, the Sense of Coherence scale, and the Yale
Brown single-item questionnaire.
RESULTS: The mean (SD) age of the participants was 66.8 (12.1) years in the
intervention group and 65.7 (13.3) years in the control group. At 12 months
post-stroke, the mean (SE) GHQ-28 score was 20.6 (0.84) in the intervention group
and 19.9 (0.85) in the control group. There were no between-group differences in 
psychosocial well-being at 12 months post-stroke (mean difference: -0.74, 95%
confidence interval (CI): -3.08, 1.60). The secondary outcomes showed no
statistically significant between-group difference in health-related quality of
life, sense of coherence, or depression at 12 months.
CONCLUSION: The results of this trial did not demonstrate lower levels of
emotional distress and anxiety or higher levels of health-related quality of life
in the intervention group (dialogue-based intervention) as compared to the
control group (usual care) at 12 months post-stroke.

DOI: 10.1177/0269215520929737 
PMCID: PMC7372590
PMID: 32517513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Case Rep Ophthalmol. 2020 May 6;11(2):167-173. doi: 10.1159/000507428.
eCollection 2020 May-Aug.

Unusual Case of Indolent Choroidal Alterations Mimicking Neurofibromatosis Type
1.

Abdolrahimzadeh S(1), Formisano M(2), Guglielmelli F(1), Amodeo S(1), Costa
MC(3), Scuderi G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology Unit, Neurosciences, Mental Health and Sensory Organs (NESMOS)
Department, Sapienza University of Rome, St. Andrea Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(2)Ophthalmology Unit, Sapienza University of Rome, Department of Sense Organs,
Policlinico Umberto I, Rome, Italy.
(3)Ophthalmology Unit, Ospedale Vito Fazzi, Lecce, Italy.

Indolent, non-progressive choroidal alterations can be strongly suggestive of
neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) but are also rarely of unknown aetiology. A
63-year-old man presented for a routine examination. Comprehensive
ophthalmological examination and retinal imaging was performed. Visual acuity was
20/20. The anterior segment and fundus were unremarkable. Near-infrared
reflectance (NIR) with spectral-domain optical coherence tomography showed
unilateral hyperreflective areas in the left posterior pole, corresponding to
choroidal nodules on enhanced depth imaging and hypofluorescent areas on
indocyanine green angiography. Dermatological evaluation and genetic testing for 
NF1 were negative. Chest computed tomography, liver function, HLA-A29, and
angiotensin-converting enzyme level were negative. The patient has remained in
good health and the choroidal alterations have remained non-progressive for 3
years. Choroidal alterations observed with NIR could be a manifestation of
somatic mosaicism or a variation of a new unclassified correlated condition that 
may be better elucidated in the future, given the use of novel imaging techniques
that are currently available in ophthalmology.

Copyright © 2020 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000507428 
PMCID: PMC7250382
PMID: 32508623 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
declare.


355. Br J Community Nurs. 2020 Jun 2;25(6):294-298. doi: 10.12968/bjcn.2020.25.6.294.

Social prescribing: a 'natural' community-based solution.

Howarth M(1), Griffiths A(2), da Silva A(3), Green R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Senior Lecturer in Nursing and Deputy Director (Programmes and training),
University of Salford Manchester.
(2)Director of Science and Collections, Royal Horticultural Society (RHS).
(3)Programme Director, RHS Garden Bridgewater.
(4)Head of RHS Garden Bridgewater.

This paper discusses social prescribing as part of the wider NHS England
universal personalised care model, and it describes how community nurses can
engage with social prescribing systems to support community resilience. A case
study based on the example of gardening, as a nature-based social prescription
provided by the RHS Bridgewater Wellbeing Garden, is provided to illustrate the
scope, reach and impact of non-medical, salutogenic approaches for community
practitioners. The authors argue that social prescribing and, in particular,
nature-based solutions, such as gardening, can be used as a non-medical
asset-based approach by all health professionals working in the community as a
way to promote health and wellbeing. They consider how the negative impact of
social distancing resulting from COVID-19 restrictions could be diluted through
collaboration between a holistic, social prescribing system and community staff. 
The paper presents a unique perspective on how community nurses can collaborate
with link workers through social prescribing to help combat social isolation and 
anxiety and support resilience.

DOI: 10.12968/bjcn.2020.25.6.294 
PMID: 32496851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


356. HERD. 2020 Oct;13(4):57-67. doi: 10.1177/1937586720929044. Epub 2020 Jun 4.

The Appropriateness of Adapting the Australian Environmental Assessment Tool-High
Care (EAT-HC) for Persons With Dementia in Singapore.

Sun J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, Faculty of Science, Medicine and Health, 90119University of
Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia.
(2)Wicking Dementia Research and Education Centre, University of Tasmania,
Hobart, Tasmania, Australia.

OBJECTIVES: This study investigated the level of acceptance in Singapore of the
eight principles of design underpinning the Environmental Assessment Tool-High
Care (EAT-HC), which is commonly used in Australia to evaluate environments for
the care of people living with dementia. A secondary goal was to identify topics 
particularly relevant to the Singaporean context, which are not included in the
Australian EAT-HC.
BACKGROUND: This study was undertaken in preparation for the development of a
Singaporean version of the Australian EAT-HC.
METHODS: Discussions from 23 focus groups involving 150 family caregivers, aged
care staff, administrators, and architects were recorded and thematically
analyzed to identify the characteristics of the principles underpinning the
EAT-HC that are unlikely to be relevant in a Singaporean version and to identify 
additional topics required to tailor it to reflect the Singaporean culture. The
thematic analysis was supplemented with quantitative data obtained through the
use of simple Likert-type scales measuring the appropriateness of each principle 
in the Singaporean context.
RESULTS: The principles of design that underpin the EAT-HC were highly accepted
by participants and provided a framework for a systematic exploration of
Singaporean residential care for people with dementia. Some topics of particular 
relevance to Singapore were identified. These can be subsumed by the principles
without the need for the principles to be changed.
CONCLUSION: The results support the use of the design principles underpinning the
EAT-HC as the foundation of a tool for the evaluation of Singaporean dementia
facilities.

DOI: 10.1177/1937586720929044 
PMID: 32495706 


357. J Psychoactive Drugs. 2020 Sep-Oct;52(4):357-365. doi:
10.1080/02791072.2020.1767832. Epub 2020 Jun 3.

Does Self-Change Occur Among Severely Dependent Substance Users?

Chen G(1), Gueta K(2), Ronel N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Criminology, Ashkelon Academic College , Ashkelon, Israel.
(2)Department of Criminology, Bar-Ilan University , Ramat Gan, Israel.

The aims of the current study were to examine differences between self-changers
(SC) and treatment-changers (TC) in sociodemographic, personal characteristics,
severity of substance use disorders (SUDs), and psychiatric problems, and to
predict the severity of SUDs, psychiatric problems, and belonging to the SC
group. The sample included 229 Israeli respondents (134 SC and 95 TC).
Significant differences between the two groups were found. The SC were younger,
had a higher sense of coherence, and reported more cannabis use. The TC were
involved more in crime and had experienced more child abuse and severe
psychiatric problems compared with the SC. No significant group differences were 
found in the severity of substance dependence. The findings suggested that
severity of SUDs did not differentiate between the groups, but the severity of
psychiatric problems and history of child abuse did. This indicates a need for
treatment interventions targeting all three issues of childhood trauma, SUDs, and
psychiatric problems.

DOI: 10.1080/02791072.2020.1767832 
PMID: 32490757 


358. Asia Pac J Ophthalmol (Phila). 2020 May-Jun;9(3):269-277. doi:
10.1097/APO.0000000000000292.

Translational Retinal Imaging.

Orellana-Rios J(1), Yokoyama S(2), Bhuiyan A(3), Gao L(4), Otero-Marquez O(5),
Smith RT(5).

Author information: 
(1)Fundación Oftalmológica Los Andes, Vitacura, Santiago de Chile, Chile.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Japan Community Healthcare Organization, Chukyo
Hospital, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.
(3)iHealthScreen Inc, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, UCLA, LA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York, NY, USA.

The diagnosis and treatment of medical retinal disease is now inseparable from
retinal imaging in all its multimodal incarnations. The purpose of this article
is to present a selection of very different retinal imaging techniques that are
truly translational, in the sense that they are not only new, but can guide us to
new understandings of disease processes or interventions that are not accessible 
by present methods. Quantitative autofluorescence imaging, now available for
clinical investigation, has already fundamentally changed our understanding of
the role of lipofuscin in age-related macular degeneration. Hyperspectral
autofluorescence imaging is bench science poised not only to unravel the
molecular basis of retinal pigment epithelium fluorescence, but also to be
translated into a clinical camera for earliest detection of age-related macular
degeneration. The ophthalmic endoscope for vitreous surgery is a radically new
retinal imaging system that enables surgical approaches heretofore impossible
while it captures subretinal images of living tissue. Remote retinal imaging
coupled with deep learning artificial intelligence will transform the very fabric
of future medical care.

DOI: 10.1097/APO.0000000000000292 
PMCID: PMC7299229
PMID: 32487917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Int J Equity Health. 2020 Jun 1;19(1):80. doi: 10.1186/s12939-020-01194-4.

Salutogenic model of health to identify turning points and coping styles for
eating practices in type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Polhuis CMM(1), Vaandrager L(2), Soedamah-Muthu SS(3)(4), Koelen MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Health and Society, Wageningen University, P.O. Box 8130, 6700 EW, Wageningen,
The Netherlands. kristel.polhuis@wur.nl.
(2)Health and Society, Wageningen University, P.O. Box 8130, 6700 EW, Wageningen,
The Netherlands.
(3)Center of Research on Psychological and Somatic disorders (CORPS), Department 
of Medical and Clinical Psychology, Tilburg University, Tilburg, The Netherlands.
(4)Institute for Food, Nutrition and Health, University of Reading, Reading, UK.

BACKGROUND: It is important for people with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) to
eat healthily. However, implementing dietary advice in everyday life is
difficult, because eating is not a distinguishable action, but a chain of
activities, embedded in social practices and influenced by previous life
experiences. This research aims to understand why and how eating practices are
developed over the life-course by investigating influential life experiences -
turning points - and coping strategies for eating practices of people with T2DM.
METHODS: The Salutogenic Model of Health guided the study's objective, study
design and analysis. Seventeen interviews were performed and analysed based on
the principles of interpretative phenomenological analysis. Narrative inquiry and
the creation of timelines and food boxes were used as tools to facilitate
reflection on turning points and eating practices.
RESULTS: Turning points for unhealthier eating were experiences that strongly
disturbed the participants' emotional stability. These experiences included
psychosocial trauma, physical health disorders, job loss, and smoking cessation. 
Turning points for healthier eating were experiences that significantly changed
participants views on life and made participants reflective about the effects of 
current eating practices on future health and life goals. These turning points
included confrontation with ill-health, becoming a parent, psychosocial therapy, 
and getting married. Notably, turning points for healthier eating seemed only to 
happen when life was relatively stress-free. All participants experienced turning
points for healthier eating, yet, not all participants succeeded in improving
their diets. Two coping styles were distinguished: active and passive coping.
Active coping individuals were able to act in line with their personal
intentions, whereas passive coping individuals could not. Differences between
active and passive coping styles seemed to be explained by differences in
available resources important for adapting and maintaining a healthy diet.
CONCLUSION: Disadvantaged childhood and later life adversities together with the 
inability to manage the mental stress explained the development unhealthier
eating practices. All participants experienced turning points for healthier
eating that caused eating to become a priority in their life. Yet, the fact that 
not all were able to eat as they intended, advocates for nutritional guidance for
people with T2DM, with a greater emphasis on reflexivity, psycho-social
well-being and social support.

DOI: 10.1186/s12939-020-01194-4 
PMCID: PMC7266427
PMID: 32487086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Australas J Ageing. 2020 Sep;39(3):e352-e359. doi: 10.1111/ajag.12797. Epub 2020 
Jun 2.

Virtual reality program to develop dementia-friendly communities in Japan.

Sari DW(1)(2), Igarashi A(1), Takaoka M(1), Yamahana R(3), Noguchi-Watanabe M(1),
Teramoto C(4), Yamamoto-Mitani N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gerontological Home Care and Long-term Care Nursing, Division of
Health Sciences & Nursing, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Community and Gerontological Nursing, Faculty of Nursing,
Universitas Airlangga, Surabaya, Indonesia.
(3)Department of Gerontological and Home-care Nursing, Chiba Faculty of Nursing, 
Tokyo Health Care University, Chiba, Japan.
(4)Department of Community Health Nursing, Division of Health Sciences & Nursing,
Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Dementia-friendly communities promote community coherence and reduce 
the risk of ageism in the community. This study examined the effects of a Virtual
Reality (VR) educational program on participants' attitudes towards dementia and 
their sense of community related to supporting community-dwelling older adults.
METHODS: We delivered an educational program using a virtual reality platform
that provided a first-person perspective of people with dementia in the
courtyards of two convenience stores in the Tokyo Metropolitan Area, Japan. We
investigated attitudes towards dementia and participants' sense of community
before and after the educational program.
RESULTS: There were 42 study participants (average age = 48 years). The total
scores of attitudes towards dementia and sense of community changed positively
from pre- to postintervention (P = .004 and <.001, respectively).
CONCLUSION: This educational program for understanding dementia could enhance
people's support of community members living with dementia.

© 2020 AJA Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/ajag.12797 
PMID: 32483931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Omega (Westport). 2020 May 27:30222820919186. doi: 10.1177/0030222820919186.
[Epub ahead of print]

Testing the Effectiveness of a Salutogenic Model for Reducing Suicidal Tendencies
in a Population of Elderly and Young Adults.

Wilchek-Aviad Y(1), Cohen-Louck K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Criminology, Ariel University.

Suicide is a leading cause of mortality worldwide, with the elderly having the
highest suicide rates. This study tests the effectiveness of a salutogenic model 
in normative elderly people compared with young adults in protecting against risk
behaviors and suicidal tendencies, based on two variables: locus of control and
meaning in life (mediating variable between locus of control and suicidal
tendency). Participants were 191 people aged 65 to 100 years and 200 young adults
aged 18 to 28 years old. Participants completed questionnaires on locus of
control and purpose in life and were assessed for suicidal tendencies. Findings
reveal a negative effect of age on locus of control, purpose in life, and a
negative correlation between purpose in life and internal locus of control and
suicidal tendency. Purpose in life mediates between internal locus of control and
suicidal tendency in both populations. The salutogenic model has significant
implications and can be used to reduce suicidal tendencies.

DOI: 10.1177/0030222820919186 
PMID: 32460669 


362. Procare. 2020;25(4):12-13. doi: 10.1007/s00735-020-1188-2. Epub 2020 May 16.

Ressourcen in Krisenzeiten: Selbst- und Sozialkompetenzen bei berufsbegleitend
Studierenden.

[Article in German]

Limarutti A(1), Mir E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Studiengänge Gesundheits- und Pflegemanagement, Fachhochschule Kärnten,
Österreich, Deutschland.

The promotion of personal and social competencies among students, especially
part-time students, seems more important these days. Actually a strong sense of
coherence and social support may be important resources to manage current
demands. This article shows what can be done by university lecturers to support
students in this critical situation and what can be done by the students
themselves in the sense of self-care.

© Springer-Verlag Wien 2020.

DOI: 10.1007/s00735-020-1188-2 
PMCID: PMC7231528
PMID: 32454565 


363. AMA J Ethics. 2020 May 1;22(5):E430-436. doi: 10.1001/amajethics.2020.430.

What Cy Twombly's Art Can Teach Us About Patients' Stories.

Baruch J(1), Springs S(2), Poterack A(3), Blythe SG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Associate professor of emergency medicine, Warren Alpert Medical School at
Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island.
(2)Research associate at the Center for Evidence Synthesis in Health at the Brown
University School of Public Health in Providence, Rhode Island.
(3)Associate educator of academic and public programs at the Rhode Island School 
of Design Museum in Providence, Rhode Island.
(4)Deputy director for exhibitions, education, and programs at the Rhode Island
School of Design Museum in Providence, Rhode Island.

Some patients' stories can be hard to tell and hard to listen to, especially in
pressured, time-pinched clinical environments. This difficulty, however, doesn't 
absolve clinicians from a duty to try to understand patients' stories, interpret 
their meanings, and respond with care. Such efforts require clinical creativity, 
full engagement, and the recognition that emotions and personal feelings leak
into the space between storyteller and story listener. Art objects are complex
bodies of information that can challenge clinicians and trainees to become more
comfortable with messy narratives as well as with ethical and aesthetic
ambiguity. By slowing down and observing art, trainees can reflect on how
clinicians make sense of stories that contain information that appears random and
lacks coherence-and, more importantly, how clinicians draw on these stories to
respond to patients' needs.

© 2020 American Medical Association. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1001/amajethics.2020.430 
PMID: 32449660 


364. Neuropsychopharmacol Rep. 2020 Sep;40(3):262-267. doi: 10.1002/npr2.12111. Epub
2020 May 23.

Personal values in adolescence and sense of coherence in adulthood: A
cross-sectional study based on a retrospective recall.

Yasuma N(1)(2), Watanabe K(1), Nishi D(1), Kawakami N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Health, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Community Mental Health and Law, National Institute of Mental
Health, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Japan.

AIMS: The purpose of this study is to retrospectively examine the association
between personal values in adolescence and sense of coherence (SOC) in adulthood.
METHODS: J-SHINE data from wave 1 (2010) and wave 3 (2017) were used in this
study. We retrospectively measured personal values at age 15 in 2017 in two ways:
(a) value priorities developed from Schwartz's theory of basic values; and (b)
the commitment to values measured by Personal Values Questionnaire II (PVQ-II).
Multiple regression analysis was used to estimate the association.
RESULTS: Having a value priority of belief, pursuing one's interest, enduring
active challenges, cherishing family and friends, and having a commitment to
values in adolescence were significantly and positively associated, while
avoiding causing trouble was significantly and negatively associated with SOC in 
adulthood.
CONCLUSIONS: Personal values in adolescence may be associated with SOC in
adulthood. Research of personal values in adolescence could contribute to the
understanding the development of SOC.

© 2020 The Authors. Neuropsychopharmacology Reports published by John Wiley &
Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of the Japanese Society of NeuropsychoPharmacology.

DOI: 10.1002/npr2.12111 
PMCID: PMC7722661
PMID: 32445298 


365. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 May 20;17(10). pii: E3586. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17103586.

Health Assets, Vocation and Zest for Healthcare work. A Salutogenic Approach to
Active Coping among Certified Nursing Assistant Students.

Colomer-Pérez N(1)(2), Chover-Sierra E(1)(3), Gea-Caballero V(4)(5),
Paredes-Carbonell JJ(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, University of Valencia, 46010 Valencia, Spain.
(2)Development and Advising in Traffic Safety (DATS) research group, INTRAS
(Instituto de Investigación en Tráfico y Seguridad Vial), 46022 Valencia, Spain.
(3)Consorcio Hospital General Universitario de Valencia. Medicina Interna, 46014 
Valencia, Spain.
(4)Escuela de Enfermería La Fe, Centro adscrito Universitat de València, 46026
València, Spain.
(5)Grupo de Investigación GREIACC, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria IIS La
Fe, 46026 València, Spain.
(6)Centre de Salut Pública d'Alzira, Conselleria de Sanitat Universal i Salut
Pública, Alzira, 46600 València, Spain.
(7)Fundació per al Foment de la Investigació Sanitària i Biomèdica de la
Comunitat Valenciana (FISABIO), 46035 València, Spain.

People's health assets (HA) mapping process and design dynamization strategies
for it are paramount issues for health promotion. These strategies improve the
health heritage of individuals and communities as both the salutogenic model of
health (SMH) and health assets model (HAM) defend. Connecting and mobilizing HA
and strengthens the 'sense of coherence' (SOC) are both related to enhancing
stress active and effective coping strategies. This study aims to describe the HA
present in a population of certified nursing assistant students (n = 921) in
Spain and then to explore their relationships with the SOC, the motivation to
choose healthcare studies and their academic performance. A great variety of HA
were identified and mapped. Findings showed that individuals with greater
motivation towards self-care and 'caring for others' as internal HA, possessed
higher SOC levels and a strong vocation for healthcare work. Differences in HA
were identified according to gender, age and employment situation. Consistent
connections between the care-relation factor and vocational factor with
interpersonal and extrapersonal HA were reported. Evidence and results
substantiated the salutogenic and asset-based approach as a proper strategy to
strengthen SOC, dynamize their HA map, reinforce the sense of calling and enable 
Certified Nurse Assistant (CNA) students to buffer against caregiving-related
stress and thrive in their profession.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17103586 
PMCID: PMC7277762
PMID: 32443778  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


366. Herzschrittmacherther Elektrophysiol. 2020 Sep;31(3):301-306. doi:
10.1007/s00399-020-00692-w. Epub 2020 May 19.

[Quality of life in patients with implantable cardioverter-defibrillator from
a salutogenic perspective : A qualitative study in cardiologic health service
research].

[Article in German]

Senn K(1)(2), Zitron E(3)(4), Katus HA(3)(4), Thomas D(3)(4), Ullrich C(5), Rahm 
AK(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Allgemeinmedizin und Versorgungsforschung, Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Deutschland. katja.senn@uni-bayreuth.de.
(2)Lehrstuhl für Medizinmanagement und Versorgungsforschung, Universität
Bayreuth, Parsifalstraße 25, 95445, Bayreuth, Deutschland.
katja.senn@uni-bayreuth.de.
(3)Kardiologie, Angiologie, Pneumologie, Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Deutschland.
(4)Heidelberger Zentrum für Herzrhythmusstörungen, Universitätsklinikum
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Deutschland.
(5)Allgemeinmedizin und Versorgungsforschung, Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Deutschland.

BACKGROUND: Evidence on disease-related quality of life (DRQoL) of patients with 
implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs) has been described
heterogeneously. Disease-specific measures of DRQoL in ICD patients are lacking.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to gain a broader understanding of
long-term DRQoL in ICD patients. Special focus was placed on stressors and
cognitive management strategies in everyday life.
METHODS: Data assessment was performed via semistructured, guideline-based
interviews. The monocentric qualitative study included 10 ICD patients with
primary and secondary prophylactic indication and 3 cardiologists. The
qualitative analysis used the salutogenesis model (Antonovsky) as a framework.
RESULTS: The interviews show that most patients do not experience a prominent
limitation in their quality of life through the ICD. We found that patients focus
on their individual coping strategies to handle the ICD indication with a sense
of coherence, aiming at understanding their situation and giving it meaning.
Whether the DRQoL is modified positively or negatively after ICD implantation
depends on individual factors of resilience and factors of coherence.
CONCLUSIONS: We established a salutogenic model for the assessment of DRQoL in
patients with ICDs. A stable DRQoL on ICD implantation and follow-up could be
achieved if patients at high risk (small sense of coherence and reduced
resilience) are identified and their individual lifestyles are taken into
account.

DOI: 10.1007/s00399-020-00692-w 
PMID: 32430841  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Can J Aging. 2020 Sep;39(3):344-347. doi: 10.1017/S0714980820000215. Epub 2020
May 19.

COVID-19: Pandemic Risk, Resilience and Possibilities for Aging Research.

Wister A(1), Speechley M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gerontology, Simon Fraser University, Vancouver, British
Columbia.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Schulich Interfaculty Program in
Public Health, Western University, London, Ontario.

The COVID-19 global crisis is reshaping Canadian society in unexpected and
profound ways. The significantly higher morbidity and mortality risks by age
suggest that this is largely a "gero-pandemic," which has thrust the field of
aging onto center stage. This editorial emphasizes that vulnerable older adults
are also those most affected by COVID-19 in terms of infection risk, negative
health effects, and the potential deleterious outcomes on a range of social,
psychological, and economic contexts - from ageism to social isolation. We also
contend that the pathogenic analysis of this pandemic needs to be balanced with a
salutogenic approach that examines the positive adaptation of people, systems and
society, termed COVID-19 resilience. This begs the question: how and why do some 
older adults and communities adapt and thrive better than others? This
examination will lead to the identification and response to research and data
gaps, challenges, and innovative opportunities as we plan for a future in which
COVID-19 has become another endemic infection in the growing list of emerging and
re-emerging pathogens.

DOI: 10.1017/S0714980820000215 
PMCID: PMC7322148
PMID: 32423497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Curr Psychol. 2020 Apr 29:1-8. doi: 10.1007/s12144-020-00766-5. [Epub ahead of
print]

Sense of coherence and burnout among school psychologists: The moderating role of
loneliness.

George-Levi S(1), Schmidt-Barad T(1), Natan I(1)(2), Margalit M(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)1School of Behavioral Sciences, Peres Academic Center, Rechovot, Israel.
(2)School Psychology Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel.
(3)3Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(4)School of Social Sciences, Peres Academic Centre, Rehovot, Israel.

School psychologist have been considered at a high risk for developing work
burnout due to their multiple responsibilities, overload and engagement in caring
for children, families and professionals. In line with the salutogenic approach, 
the aim of the current research was to investigate protective and risk factors to
burnout. Research has indicated that sense of coherence (SOC) may act as a
protective factor. Studies reported that loneliness has been found a risk factor 
that may advance burnout. The current study hypothesized that loneliness may
moderate the link between SOC and burnout. In a sample of 104 Israeli school
psychologists, demographic aspects such as the gender, years of experience, or
type of school in which they work did not predict the burnout, focusing on the
importance of emotional aspects. The analysis demonstrated that the SOC was
negatively associated with burnout among low or mean levels of loneliness, but
not among psychologists with high levels of loneliness. The current study
provides a new insight into the burnout risk, through the focus on personal
resources and social perceptions. Implications for theoretical and practices are 
further discussed.

© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2020.

DOI: 10.1007/s12144-020-00766-5 
PMCID: PMC7223598
PMID: 32421100 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of InterestThe authors declare that
there are no conflicts of interest with respect to the authorship or the
publication of this article.


369. Acta Biomed. 2020 May 11;91(2):13-22. doi: 10.23750/abm.v91i2.9615.

COVID-19 and Cities: from Urban Health strategies to the pandemic challenge. A
Decalogue of Public Health opportunities.

Capolongo S(1), Rebecchi A(2), Buffoli M(3), Appolloni L(4), Signorelli C(5),
Fara GM(6), D'Alessandro D(7).

Author information: 
(1)Politecnico di Milano, Department of Architecture, Built environment and
Construction engineering (DABC). stefano.capolongo@polimi.it.
(2)Politecnico di Milano, Department of Architecture, Built environment and
Construction engineering (DABC). andrea.rebecchi@polimi.it.
(3)Politecnico di Milano, Department of Architecture, Built environment and
Construction engineering (DABC). maddalena.buffoli@polimi.it.
(4)Sapienza University of Rome, Department of Civil Building Environmental
Engineering (DICEA). letizia.appolloni@uniroma1.it.
(5)University Vita-Salute San Raffaele, Milan. signorelli.carlo@hsr.it.
(6)Sapienza University of Rome, Department of Public Health and Infectious
diseases (DSPMI). gaetanomaria.fara@uniroma1.it.
(7)Sapienza University of Rome, Department of Civil Building Environmental
Engineering (DICEA). daniela.dalessandro@uniroma1.it.

BACKGROUND AND AIM OF THE WORK: The ongoing pandemic of COVID-19, which nowadays 
has exceeded 2.5 million notified infections in the world and about 200,000
deaths, is a strong reminder that urbanization has changed the way that people
and communities live, work, and interact, and it's necessary to make resilient
the systems and local capacities to prevent the spread of infectious diseases.
How we can re-design the concept of Public Health in relation to the built
environment and the contemporary cities?
METHODS: According to the previous statements and scenario, aim of this paper is 
to integrate the Urban Health strategic objectives, focusing the possible
responses, both immediate and medium-long term, to the current environmental,
social, and economic aspects of the "period" of physical distancing.  Results.
Immediate Actions are 01. program the flexibility of city schedules; 02. plan a
smart and sustainable mobility network; 03. define a neighborhood services' plan;
04. develop a digitization of the urban context, promoting the smart communities;
05. re-think the accessibility to the places of culture and tourism.  Medium-long
term Actions are 06. design the indoor flexibility of domestic living spaces; 07.
re-think building typologies, fostering the presence of semi-private or
collective spaces; 08. renovate the basic care services' network; 09. integrate
the existing environmental emergency plans, with those related to the health
emergencies; 10. improve stakeholders' awareness of the factors affecting Public 
Health in the cities.
CONCLUSIONS: The Decalogue of Public Health opportunities may provide a useful
basis for Designers (Architects and Urban Planners), Policy Makers, Public Health
experts and Local Health Agencies, in promoting actions and policies aimed to
transform our cities in healthier and Salutogenic living environments.
(www.actabiomedica.it).

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v91i2.9615 
PMCID: PMC7569650
PMID: 32420919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Acta Oncol. 2020 Aug;59(8):959-966. doi: 10.1080/0284186X.2020.1759823. Epub 2020
May 15.

Negative illness perceptions are related to more fatigue among haematological
cancer survivors: a PROFILES study.

Schoormans D(1), Jansen M(1), Mols F(1)(2), Oerlemans S(2).

Author information: 
(1)CoRPS - Center of Research on Psychological and Somatic disorders, Department 
of Medical and Clinical Psychology, Tilburg University, Tilburg, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Research, Netherlands Comprehensive Cancer Organisation (IKNL), 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Objectives: The common sense model provides a theoretical framework for
understanding substantial fatigue among (haematological) cancer survivors based
on their illness perceptions. We therefore examined the associations between
modifiable illness perceptions and substantial fatigue while controlling for
sociodemographic, clinical, and psychological factors (symptoms of depression and
anxiety) among haematological cancer survivors.Methods: Data from the
population-based PROFILES registry were used. Survivors diagnosed between 1999
and 2013 with Hodgkin lymphoma (N = 164), non-Hodgkin lymphoma (N = 655) and
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (N = 174) were included. Survivors completed the
Brief Illness Perception Questionnaire (B-IPQ), the Fatigue Assessment Scale
(FAS), and Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS). Multivariable logistic
regressions analyses were performed for the total group and three haematological 
cancers separately relating illness perceptions to substantial fatigue (>21
FAS).Results: Haematological cancer survivors with illness perceptions that
represent more negative consequences (consequences, OR = 1.27; 95%CI =
1.13-1.42); attribute more symptoms to their illness (identity, OR = 1.29; 95%CI 
= 1.17-1.43); and have a poorer illness understanding (coherence, 1.13;
1.04-1.22) were more often substantially fatigued. For the remaining five illness
perceptions, no significant association was found. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma survivors
who reported a poor illness understanding (coherence, OR = 1.35; 95% CI =
1.06-1.72) and chronic lymphocytic leukaemia survivors who reported that
treatment can control (OR = 1.25; 95%CI = 1.01-1.55) the illness experienced more
often substantial fatigue.Conclusion: Those who experience more consequences of
their disease, attribute more symptoms to their illness, and have a poorer
illness understanding, have a higher risk to experience substantial levels of
fatigue even years after diagnosis. Psychological interventions changing these
illness perceptions may be beneficial in reducing fatigue among haematological
cancer survivors.

DOI: 10.1080/0284186X.2020.1759823 
PMID: 32412348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Psychosom Med. 2020 Jul/Aug;82(6):561-567. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000812.

Sense of Coherence and Mortality: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Piiroinen I(1), Tuomainen TP, Tolmunen T, Kauhanen J, Kurl S, Nilsen C, Suominen 
S, Välimäki T, Voutilainen A.

Author information: 
(1)From the Institute of Public Health and Clinical Nutrition (Piiroinen,
Tuomainen, Kauhanen, Kurl, Voutilainen), University of Eastern Finland; Kuopio
University Hospital (Tolmunen), Kuopio, Finland; Aging Research Center,
Karolinska Institutet and Stockholm University (Nilsen), Stockholm, Sweden;
University of Turku (Suominen), Turku, Finland; University of Skövde (Suominen), 
Skövde, Sweden; and Department of Nursing Science (Välimäki), University of
Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to investigate the association between sense 
of coherence (SOC) and all-cause mortality in the general adult population.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort
studies. We searched eight electronic bibliographic databases for eligible
studies. A random effects model and the restricted maximum likelihood method were
used to calculate the pooled effect size.
RESULTS: Eight studies were eligible for the meta-analysis. The studies included 
48,138 participants, of whom 5307 died during a median follow-up of 14.1 years
(range, 8-29.5 years). Their age ranged from 20 to 80 years, and 53% of them were
men. In the meta-analysis model of crude values, the risk of all-cause mortality 
for individuals with a weak SOC (lowest tertile) was 1.30 (95% confidence
interval [CI] = 1.09-1.55, p = .003, I = 78.84%) compared with individuals with a
strong SOC (highest tertile). In the model adjusted for age, the risk remained
almost the same (risk ratio = 1.26, 95% CI = 1.15-1.38, p < .001, I = 69.59%). In
the model adjusted for several other risk factors for mortality, the risk was
still 1.17 (95% CI = 1.07-1.27, p < .001, I = 57.85%).
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis shows that a weak SOC is associated with an
increased risk of all-cause mortality in the general adult population. Future
studies are needed to further develop assessment tools for SOC with good
psychometric properties and to determine the disease processes that mediate the
association of SOC with mortality.

DOI: 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000812 
PMID: 32398414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Clin Med. 2020 May 10;9(5). pii: E1411. doi: 10.3390/jcm9051411.

Macular Ganglion Cell Layer Thickness after Macula-Off Rhegmatogenous Retinal
Detachment Repair: Scleral Buckling versus Pars Plana Vitrectomy.

Gharbiya M(1), Albanese GM(1), Plateroti AM(1), Marcelli M(1), Marenco M(1),
Lambiase A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology Unit, Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome,
Umberto I University Hospital, 00161 Rome, Italy.

(1) Background: We evaluated macular ganglion cell layer-inner plexiform layer
(GCL-IPL) thickness in patients with primary macula-off rhegmatogenous retinal
detachment (RRD) treated with scleral buckling (SB) or pars plana vitrectomy
(PPV) using spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT). (2) Methods:
In this retrospective, observational study, we reviewed the medical records of
patients undergoing SB or PPV surgery for macula-off RRD. SD-OCT was performed at
three and 12 months after surgery. The central and parafoveal GCL-IPL thicknesses
in treated eyes were compared with those of healthy fellow eyes. OCT measurements
between the SB and PPV group were also compared using the analysis of covariance.
(3) Results: Seventy-one eyes of 71 patients with a mean age of 61.2 ± 11.7 years
were included. The parafoveal GCL-IPL thickness of the PPV group was
significantly reduced, with respect to fellow eyes, at three and 12 months (p <
0.01). After adjusting for age, axial length, spherical equivalent, RD extent,
preoperative intraretinal cysts, duration of symptoms and postoperative IOP, the 
parafoveal GCL-IPL thickness in the PPV group was significantly reduced with
respect to the SB group, both at three and 12 months (F = 11.45, p = 0.001 and F 
= 12.37, p = 0.001, respectively). (4) Conclusions: In conclusion, the GCL-IPL is
reduced in thickness in eyes with macula-off RRD treated with vitrectomy and is
significantly thinner compared to eyes undergoing scleral buckling surgery.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm9051411 
PMCID: PMC7290697
PMID: 32397630 


373. Front Psychol. 2020 Apr 23;11:709. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00709. eCollection
2020.

A Clinician and Service User's Perspective on Managing MS: Pleasure, Purpose,
Practice.

Hunter R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Swansea University, Swansea, United Kingdom.

There is a growing body of evidence that points to an important role for
modification of lifestyle factors and promotion of health-related quality of life
in the secondary prevention of disease progression in multiple sclerosis
(D'Hooghe et al., 2010; Weiland et al., 2014; Hadgkiss et al., 2015). As a
clinical psychologist diagnosed with multiple sclerosis in 2012 I have gained a
unique insight into ways in which people living with MS and clinicians can
usefully integrate evidence-based lifestyle modifications that enhance
self-efficacy and self-management to improve wider psychological and physical
health. The framework presented here enables clinicians to engage in salutogenic 
health promotion by placing value upon the importance of healthy, evidence-based 
behavior change. Furthermore, the framework provides a structure which can
empower and provide guidance for people living with MS on what and how to
implement and sustain behavior change and emotional wellbeing in the face of this
life-changing diagnosis.

Copyright © 2020 Hunter.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00709 
PMCID: PMC7191068
PMID: 32390911 


374. J Cell Biol. 2020 Jun 1;219(6). pii: e201907154. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201907154.

Microtubules control cellular shape and coherence in amoeboid migrating cells.

Kopf A(1), Renkawitz J(1)(2), Hauschild R(1), Girkontaite I(3), Tedford K(4),
Merrin J(1), Thorn-Seshold O(5), Trauner D(6), Häcker H(7), Fischer KD(4),
Kiermaier E(1)(8), Sixt M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria.
(2)Biomedical Center, Walter Brendel Center of Experimental Medicine, Institute
of Cardiovascular Physiology and Pathophysiology, University Hospital,
Ludwig-Maximilians University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(3)Department of Immunology, State Research Institute Centre for Innovative
Medicine, Vilnius, Lithuania.
(4)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Medical Faculty, Otto-von-Guericke
University, Magdeburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, Ludwig-Maximilians University of Munich, Munich,
Germany.
(6)Department of Chemistry, New York University, New York, NY.
(7)Division of Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Pathology, University
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT.
(8)Life and Medical Sciences Institute (LIMES), Immune and Tumor Biology,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Comment in
    J Cell Biol. 2020 Jun 1;219(6):.

Cells navigating through complex tissues face a fundamental challenge: while
multiple protrusions explore different paths, the cell needs to avoid
entanglement. How a cell surveys and then corrects its own shape is poorly
understood. Here, we demonstrate that spatially distinct microtubule dynamics
regulate amoeboid cell migration by locally promoting the retraction of
protrusions. In migrating dendritic cells, local microtubule depolymerization
within protrusions remote from the microtubule organizing center triggers
actomyosin contractility controlled by RhoA and its exchange factor Lfc.
Depletion of Lfc leads to aberrant myosin localization, thereby causing two
effects that rate-limit locomotion: (1) impaired cell edge coordination during
path finding and (2) defective adhesion resolution. Compromised shape control is 
particularly hindering in geometrically complex microenvironments, where it leads
to entanglement and ultimately fragmentation of the cell body. We thus
demonstrate that microtubules can act as a proprioceptive device: they sense cell
shape and control actomyosin retraction to sustain cellular coherence.

© 2020 Kopf et al.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201907154 
PMCID: PMC7265309
PMID: 32379884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Sci Rep. 2020 May 6;10(1):7637. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-63303-1.

Using Coherence-based spectro-spatial filters for stimulus features prediction
from electro-corticographic recordings.

Delgado Saa J(1)(2), Christen A(3), Martin S(3), Pasley BN(4), Knight RT(4),
Giraud AL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Auditory Language Group, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
jaime.delgado@gmail.com.
(2)BSPAI Lab, Universidad del Norte, Barranquilla, Colombia.
jaime.delgado@gmail.com.
(3)Auditory Language Group, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Knight Lab, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, USA.

The traditional approach in neuroscience relies on encoding models where brain
responses are related to different stimuli in order to establish dependencies. In
decoding tasks, on the contrary, brain responses are used to predict the stimuli,
and traditionally, the signals are assumed stationary within trials, which is
rarely the case for natural stimuli. We hypothesize that a decoding model
assuming each experimental trial as a realization of a random process more likely
reflects the statistical properties of the undergoing process compared to the
assumption of stationarity. Here, we propose a Coherence-based spectro-spatial
filter that allows for reconstructing stimulus features from brain signal's
features. The proposed method extracts common patterns between features of the
brain signals and the stimuli that produced them. These patterns, originating
from different recording electrodes are combined, forming a spatial filter that
produces a unified prediction of the presented stimulus. This approach takes into
account frequency, phase, and spatial distribution of brain features, hence
avoiding the need to predefine specific frequency bands of interest or phase
relationships between stimulus and brain responses manually. Furthermore, the
model does not require the tuning of hyper-parameters, reducing significantly the
computational load attached to it. Using three different cognitive tasks (motor
movements, speech perception, and speech production), we show that the proposed
method consistently improves stimulus feature predictions in terms of correlation
(group averages of 0.74 for motor movements, 0.84 for speech perception, and 0.74
for speech production) in comparison with other methods based on regularized
multivariate regression, probabilistic graphical models and artificial neural
networks. Furthermore, the model parameters revealed those anatomical regions and
spectral components that were discriminant in the different cognitive tasks. This
novel method does not only provide a useful tool to address fundamental
neuroscience questions, but could also be applied to neuroprosthetics.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-63303-1 
PMCID: PMC7203138
PMID: 32376909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


376. BMC Oral Health. 2020 May 6;20(1):131. doi: 10.1186/s12903-020-01120-8.

Psychosocial, education, economic factors, decision-making ability, and caries
status of mothers of children younger than 6 years in suburban Nigeria.

Folayan MO(1), El Tantawi M(2), Oginni A(3), Adeniyi A(4), Alade M(5), Finlayson 
TL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife, Nigeria. toyinukpong@yahoo.co.uk.
(2)Faculty of Dentistry, Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt.
(3)Innovative Aid, Abuja, Nigeria.
(4)Lagos State University College of Medicine, Lagos, Nigeria.
(5)Obafemi Awolowo University Teaching Hospitals' Complex, Ile-Ife, Nigeria.
(6)School of Public Health, San Diego State University, San Diego, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Little information is available on the relationship between mothers' 
psychosocial profile and caries status, and less information is available on the 
oral health status and psychosocial status of mothers of young children in
Africa. This study examined the association between the psychosocial profile of
mothers in Nigeria and their prevalence of caries.
METHODS: The prevalence of caries and severe caries (DMFT > 3) in mothers with
children 71 months old and younger recruited through a household survey in
Ile-Ife, Nigeria, was estimated through clinical examination. The explanatory
variables were maternal education, income, decision-making status, and
psychosocial status (dental anxiety, general anxiety, depressive symptoms,
parenting stress, executive dysfunction, sense of coherence, fatalism and social 
support). The risk indicators for maternal caries were analyzed with logistic
regression.
RESULTS: The prevalence of caries was 3.3%. Twenty (39.2%) of the 51 women with
caries had DMFT > 3. Most study participants were 25-34 years old (59.3%), had
secondary level education (63.1%), earned N18,000 ($49)-N30000 ($84) per month
(42.9%), and can make autonomous decisions about their health care, household
purchases, or visits to family/relatives (68.8%). Most women had normal general
anxiety (79.9%), low dental anxiety (90.4%), and normal stress (76.4%) levels.
Most also had high fatalism (56.6%), perceived moderate social support (81.6%),
had normal depressive symptoms (75.9%), low executive dysfunction (55.9%), and
high sense of coherence (53.8%). Mothers who had clinically significant levels of
stress were twice more likely to have caries than were those whose level of
stress was normal (AOR: 2.26; 95%CI: 1.04-4.89; P = 0.039). Also, mothers who had
high fatalism were less likely to have caries than were those with low fatalism
(AOR: 0.40; 95%CI: 0.21-0.75; P = 0.004).
CONCLUSION: High levels of parenting stress was a risk indicator for caries while
high fatalism was protective from caries in mothers of children younger than
6-years. Maternal education, income and decision-making ability were not
associated with maternal caries. Though the caries prevalence for women with
young children was low, the prevalence of severe caries was high and this because
of the possible negative effect on their health and wellbeing.

DOI: 10.1186/s12903-020-01120-8 
PMCID: PMC7201958
PMID: 32375771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Omega (Westport). 2020 May 6:30222820923905. doi: 10.1177/0030222820923905. [Epub
ahead of print]

Exploring Factors That Helped Adolescents Adjust and Continue With Life After the
Death of a Parent.

Ludik D(1), Greeff AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa.

The aim of this study was to explore factors that helped adolescents to adjust
and continue with life after the death of a parent. A qualitative research design
was utilized, in which 12 participants participated in semistructured interviews.
Data were analyzed according to thematic analysis. The following categories and
themes emerged from the data: family support-supportive remaining parent, parent 
has a supportive partner and supportive extended family; social support-child has
supportive friends and supportive community; religion--religion as a coping
mechanism and religion as means of communicating with the deceased parent; and a 
strong personal sense of coherence (the ability to relate to and make sense of
the world) as an intrapersonal coping mechanism. In addition, the following
themes also emerged: exercising, allowing time to prepare for the death of a
terminally ill parent, tangible reminders of the deceased, and journal writing.
The findings can be used to design interventions for adolescents whose parent has
passed away.

DOI: 10.1177/0030222820923905 
PMID: 32375591 


378. PLoS One. 2020 May 4;15(5):e0232495. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0232495.
eCollection 2020.

The influence of an induced negative emotional state on autobiographical memory
coherence.

Vanderveren E(1), Aerts L(2), Rousseaux S(2), Bijttebier P(3), Hermans D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Psychology of Learning and Experimental Psychopathology, KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Undergraduate students clinical and health psychology, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.
(3)School Psychology and Development in Context, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Individuals who experience difficulty constructing coherent narratives about
significant personal experiences generally report less psychological well-being
and more depressive symptoms. It remains, however, unclear whether a negative
emotional state, one of the core symptoms of depression, causes this impairment
in autobiographical memory coherence. The current study aimed to examine the
causal relation between mood and memory coherence by means of a mood induction
paradigm. A group of 165 students were randomly allocated to one of three mood
groups: negative, positive, and neutral. We hypothesized that memory coherence
would decrease following a negative mood induction. In addition, working memory
capacity was expected to mediate the association between mood and memory
coherence. Contrary to predictions, memory coherence increased following a
negative mood induction. This increase was likewise observed in the positive mood
group, though memory coherence remained consistent in the neutral mood group.
This effect of mood on memory coherence was solely observed in female
participants and not in the small male subsample. Results provided no support for
the hypothesis that working memory capacity functioned as an underlying
mechanism. Different theoretical explanations are discussed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0232495 
PMCID: PMC7197819
PMID: 32365109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


379. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2020 Sep;35(9):989-999. doi: 10.1002/gps.5321. Epub
2020 May 14.

Late-life personality traits, cognitive impairment, and mortality in a
population-based cohort.

Neuvonen E(1), Hall A(1), Tolppanen AM(2)(3), Ngandu T(4)(5), Rusanen M(1)(4)(6),
Laatikainen T(4)(7)(8), Soininen H(1)(6), Kivipelto M(1)(5)(7)(9), Solomon
A(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine/Neurology, School of Medicine, University of
Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.
(2)Research Centre for Comparative Effectiveness and Patient Safety, University
of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.
(3)School of Pharmacy, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.
(4)Public Health Promotion Unit, Department of Public Health Solutions, National 
Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Division of Clinical Geriatrics, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences,
and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Neurocenter, Department of Neurology, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio,
Finland.
(7)Institute of Public Health and Clinical Nutrition, School of Medicine,
University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.
(8)Joint Municipal Authority for North Karelia Social and Health Services (Siun
sote), Joensuu, Finland.
(9)Ageing Epidemiology (AGE) Research Unit, School of Public Health, Imperial
College London, London, UK.

OBJECTIVES: We examined longitudinal associations between late-life personality
traits and cognitive impairment, dementia, and mortality in the population-based 
Cardiovascular Risk Factors, Aging and Dementia (CAIDE) Study.
METHODS: Anger expression and trait anger (State-Trait Anger Expression
Inventory), anxiety (State-Trait Anxiety Inventory), and sense of coherence
(Sense of Coherence Scale) were assessed at the 1998 CAIDE visit (1266
cognitively normal individuals, mean age 71.0 years). Totally, 582 participants
had complete re-examination in 2005-2008 (105 mild cognitive impairment, MCI; and
29 dementia). National registers data until 2008 were also used for both
participants and nonparticipants to ascertain incident dementia (96 cases) and
mortality (227 died). Analyses were adjusted for age, sex, education, follow-up
time, cardiovascular and lifestyle factors, and depressive symptoms.
RESULTS: Higher anxiety was associated with higher risk of MCI/dementia (OR 1.68,
95% CI 1.07-2.63) and death (HR 1.46, 95% CI 1.08-1.98). High sense of coherence 
was associated with lower mortality (HR 0.65, 95% CI 0.45-0.93). These
associations were attenuated after accounting for depressive symptoms (OR 1.57,
95% CI 0.96-2.58 for anxiety-MCI/dementia; HR 1.35, 95% CI 0.97-1.86 for
anxiety-mortality; and HR 0.68, 95% CI 0.45-1.04 for sense of
coherence-mortality). Trait anger was associated with higher dementia risk even
after adjustments (HR 1.90, 95% CI 1.14-3.18).
CONCLUSIONS: Anxiety was linked to worse cognitive outcome and mortality and
sense of coherence to lower mortality. Depressive symptoms attenuated the
associations. As a novel finding, trait anger was connected to dementia risk.
These findings emphasize the importance of personality-related risk factors for
dementia and mortality. J Am Geriatr Soc 68:-, 2020.

© 2020 The Authors. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry published by
John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.5321 
PMID: 32363652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Scand J Prim Health Care. 2020 Jun;38(2):192-200. doi:
10.1080/02813432.2020.1753379. Epub 2020 May 2.

Two-year weight, risk and health factor outcomes of a weight-reduction
intervention programme: Primary prevention for overweight in a multicentre
primary healthcare setting.

Bräutigam-Ewe M(1), Lydell M(2), Bergh H(1)(3), Hildingh C(2), Baigi A(1)(3),
Månsson J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Community Medicine/Primary Health Care, The
Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)School of Health and Welfare, Halmstad University, Halmstad, Sweden.
(3)Research and Development Unit Region of Halland, Sweden.

Objective: To study the long-term effects of weight reduction, quality of life
and sense of coherence in a primary health care (PHC)-based programme with two
different intensities.Design: Prospective two-armed randomised
intervention.Setting: Three PHC centres in south west of Sweden.Subjects: In
total, 289 women and men aged 40-65 years with a BMI of 28-35 were recruited for 
a two-year weight-reduction programme. Participants were randomized to
high-intensity or low-intensity groups. Blood samples, physical measurements and 
questionnaires were analysed. Participants received cookbooks and dietary
lectures. The high-intensity group also received Motivational interviewing (MI), 
dietary advice on prescription (DAP- advice), a grocery store lecture, a website 
and weekly e-mails.Main outcome measures: Weight, quality of life, risks and
health factors.Results: In total, 182 (64%) participants completed the 2-year
follow-up. The total sample reduced their weight by 1 kg (p = 0.006). No
significant differences regarding weight were found between the groups.
Anxiety/depression decreased in EQ5-D (p = 0.021), EQ5-D VAS (p = 0.002) and SOC 
(p = 0.042). Between the groups, there were significant differences in EQ5-D
usual activities (p = 0.004), anxiety/depression (p = 0.013), pain/discomfort (p 
= 0.041), fruit and vegetables (p = 0.005), HLV anxiety (p = 0.005), and visits
to nurses (p = 0.012).Conclusion: The total population lost weight, and the
high-intensity and low-intensity programmes did not result in significant
differences in terms of weight. The high-intensity programme reported health
benefits linked to lower levels of anxiety and depression, increased activity and
intake of greens and reduced visits to physicians and nurses.Key pointsBoth
groups had a consisting weight- reduction after two years.High intensity did not 
lead to a significant difference in weight reduction between the groups.The
high-intensity group reported more health effects, such as better quality of
life, reduced anxiety, and increased greenery intake. It is unknown how much
support patients in a weight- reduction programme in PHC require to succeed with 
weight loss and a healthy lifestyle.

DOI: 10.1080/02813432.2020.1753379 
PMID: 32362238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Integr Psychol Behav Sci. 2020 Sep;54(3):677-685. doi:
10.1007/s12124-020-09533-4.

The Need for Epistemological Vigilance : (Commentary to the Target Article
"Psychology: A Giant With Feet of Clay", Zagaria, Andò & Zennaro).

Martí E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Facultat de Psicologia, University of Barcelona, 181 Passeig de la Vall
d'Hebron, Barcelona, 08035, España. emarti@ub.edu.

Comment on
    Integr Psychol Behav Sci. 2020 Sep;54(3):521-562.

The analysis and proposal of Zagaria, Andò and Zennaro are suggestive, but the
essential question is not raised: the need for scientific research to be
explicitly based on an epistemological reflection that takes into account the
specificity of psychology. In the first and second parts of my comment, I will
justify the need for epistemological reflection in psychology, and in the third
part, I will analyze, by means of an example, why the option of adopting the
principles of evolutionary psychology does not guarantee greater theoretical
coherence.

DOI: 10.1007/s12124-020-09533-4 
PMID: 32361964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Apr 26;17(9). pii: E3003. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17093003.

Sense of Coherence in Association with Stress Experience and Health in
Adolescents.

Moksnes UK(1)(2), Espnes GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Nursing, NTNU Center for Health Promotion
Research, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 7030 Trondheim, Norway.
(2)Faculty of Nursing and Health Sciences, Nord University, 8026 Bodø, Norway.

This study investigated the associations between sex, age, socio-economic status,
stress, sense of coherence (SOC), and health (mental wellbeing, depressive
symptoms, self-rated health, and subjective health complaints) in Norwegian
adolescents aged 13-19 years. Furthermore, the study investigated the potential
protective or compensatory role from SOC on the association between stress and
health. Methods: The study was based on a cross-sectional sample of 1233
adolescents. Data were analyzed with descriptive, comparative, and multiple
linear regression analyses. Results: Girls reported significantly higher scores
on depressive symptoms and subjective health complaints than boys. Stress was
significantly and positively associated with depressive symptoms. SOC associated 
significantly with all outcome variables; and especially with mental wellbeing
and depressive symptoms. Significant interaction effects of sex in combination
with stress and SOC were found in association with depression and mental
wellbeing. Associations were strongest for girls. Conclusion: The findings
provided support for the significant role of SOC as a coping resource, especially
in relation to adolescents' mental health; weaker associations were found with
subjective health complains and self-rated health. The findings also mainly
supported a compensatory role of SOC on the association between stress and health
during adolescence.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17093003 
PMCID: PMC7246660
PMID: 32357461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Apr 24;17(8). pii: E2922. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17082922.

Psychological Resilience of Volunteers in a South African Health Care Context: A 
Salutogenic Approach and Hermeneutic Phenomenological Inquiry.

Barnard A(1), Furtak A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial and Organisational Psychology, University of South
Africa, Pretoria 0003, South Africa.
(2)Department of Human Resource Management, University of South Africa, Pretoria 
0003, South Africa.

Volunteering in non-Western countries, such as South Africa, is subject to poor
infrastructure, lack of resources, poverty-stricken conditions and often
conducted by volunteers from lower socio-economic spheres of society. Sustaining 
the well-being of volunteers in this context is essential in ensuring their
continued capacity to volunteer. To do so, it is important to understand the
psychological resilience of these volunteers and the resistance resources they
employ to positively adapt to their challenging work-life circumstances. The aim 
of this qualitative hermeneutic phenomenological study was to explore volunteers'
psychological resilience from a salutogenic perspective. In-depth interviews were
conducted with eight volunteers servicing government-run hospitals. Data were
analysed through phenomenological hermeneutical analysis. Findings show a
characteristic work-life orientation to be at the root of volunteers' resilience.
Their work-life orientation is based on a distinct inner drive, an
other-directedness and a "calling" work orientation. It is proposed that this
work-life orientation enables volunteers in this study context, to cope with and 
positively adapt to challenging work-life circumstances and continue
volunteering. The elements of their work-life orientation are presented as
intrapersonal strength resources fundamental to their psychological resilience.
It is suggested that organisations invest in developmental interventions that
endorse and promote these intrapersonal strengths.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17082922 
PMCID: PMC7215793
PMID: 32344504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Stress Health. 2020 Oct;36(4):546-554. doi: 10.1002/smi.2949. Epub 2020 May 7.

Pre-rehabilitation sense of coherence as a predictor of symptom change after
rehabilitation.

Schäfer SK(1), Schanz CG(1), Sopp MR(1), Lass-Hennemann J(1), Käfer M(2), Michael
T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Saarland University, Saarbruecken,
Germany.
(2)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine, MediClin Bliestal Kliniken, Blieskastel,
Germany.

Sense of coherence (SOC) constitutes the key component of salutogenesis theory.
It reflects individuals' confidence that their environment is comprehensible and 
manageable and that their lives are meaningful. Research demonstrates a strong
cross-sectional relationship between SOC and mental health. However, little is
known about SOC's temporal stability and its potential to predict changes in
psychopathological symptom severity in different settings. The goal of the
current study was to address this gap. The sample of the two-wave longitudinal
study consists of 294 patients receiving inpatient psychotherapeutic (and
psychopharmacological) treatment for various psychological disorders at a German 
psychosomatic rehabilitation clinic. SOC (Antonovsky, Social Science & Medicine, 
1993, 36, 725-733) and outcome measures (i.e., general mental health problems,
depression and anxiety symptoms) were assessed within two days of arrival and at 
the end of rehabilitation (week 5/6). SOC was significantly enhanced after
treatment whereas psychopathological symptoms were significantly reduced.
Regression analyses revealed that pre-treatment SOC was a significant negative
predictor of post-treatment symptom severity for all outcome measures even after 
controlling for pre-treatment symptoms. The current findings provide first
evidence that SOC is a significant unique predictor of symptom change. Future
studies need to further investigate longitudinal associations between SOC and
mental health outcomes in different settings.

© 2020 The Authors. Stress and Health Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/smi.2949 
PMID: 32343492 


385. BJOG. 2020 Oct;127(11):1382-1390. doi: 10.1111/1471-0528.16271. Epub 2020 May 28.

Severe obstetric lacerations associated with postpartum depression among women
with low resilience - a Swedish birth cohort study.

Asif S(1), Mulic-Lutvica A(1), Axfors C(1), Eckerdal P(1), Iliadis SI(1),
Fransson E(1)(2), Skalkidou A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Tumour and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Women's levels of resilience and attitudes towards perineal
lacerations vary greatly. Some women see them as part of the birthing process,
while others react with anger, depressed mood or even thoughts of self-harm. A
previous study has reported increased risk of postpartum depressive (PPD)
symptoms in women with severe perineal lacerations. The aim of this study was to 
assess the association between severe obstetric perineal lacerations and PPD. A
secondary objective was to assess this association among women with low
resilience.
DESIGN: Nested cohort study.
SETTING: Uppsala, Sweden.
SAMPLE: Vaginally delivered women with singleton pregnancies (n = 2990).
METHODS: The main exposure was obstetric perineal lacerations. Resilience was
assessed in gestational week 32 using the Swedish version of the Sense of
Coherence Scale. A digital acyclic graph was used to identify possible
confounders and mediators. Logistic regression was used to estimate odds
ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). A sub-analysis was run after
excluding women with normal or high resilience.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Postpartum depression, assessed with the Depression
Self-Reporting Scale, completed at 6 weeks postpartum.
RESULTS: There was no significant association between severe obstetric perineal
lacerations and PPD at 6 weeks postpartum. However, a significant association was
found between severe lacerations and PPD in women with low resilience (OR = 4.8, 
95% CI 1.2-20), persisting even after adjusting for confounding factors.
CONCLUSION: Healthcare professionals might need to identify women with low
resilience, as they are at increased risk for PPD after a severe perineal
laceration.
TWEETABLE ABSTRACT: Severe perineal lacerations associated with postpartum
depression in women with low resilience in a Swedish cohort.

© 2020 The Authors. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology 
published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Royal College of Obstetricians
and Gynaecologists.

DOI: 10.1111/1471-0528.16271 
PMID: 32339378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Community Dent Health. 2020 Aug 31;37(3):199-204. doi:
10.1922/CDH_00046Elheeny06.

Determinants of oral-health related quality of life and overall quality of life
among early adolescents with type-1 diabetes.

Elheeny AAH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lecturer of Paediatric and Community Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, Minia
University.

OBJECTIVE: To identify determinants of oral health-quality of life (OHRQoL) and
its association with overall quality of life (QoL).
BASIC RESEARCH DESIGN: Cross-sectional analytic study. Predictors variables were 
selected based on Wilson and Cleary's model for patient outcomes including
individual factors and socioeconomic status (SES) to represent environmental and 
clinical/biological factors.
PARTICIPANTS: 444 children aged 11 to 14 years.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: OHRQoL and overall QoL. Data were analysed using
univariate correlation coefficients and structural equation modelling. The
initial path was analysed for the goodness-of-fit. The level of significance
adjusted at 5% and 95% confidence intervals.
RESULTS: In the final model, sense of coherence (SOC) and dental coping behaviour
displayed direct and indirect effects on OHRQoL and QoL. Gingival condition and
metabolic disease control displayed bidirectional effects on overall QoL. SES was
directly and indirectly associated with OHRQoL. The fit of final model indicators
was CFI = 0.99, GFI = 0.99. AGFI = 0.68, TLI = 0.97, RMSEA =0.03, χ² = 13.25, and
χ²/d.f. ratio = 1.43 (p ⟩ 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Enhancing the SOC and SE of early adolescents with T1DM may improve 
their oral-health related quality of life and overall quality of life.

Copyright© 2020 Dennis Barber Ltd.

DOI: 10.1922/CDH_00046Elheeny06 
PMID: 32338838  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Scand J Caring Sci. 2021 Jun;35(2):512-520. doi: 10.1111/scs.12863. Epub 2020 Apr
24.

A 'near-life experience': lived experiences of spirituality from the perspective 
of people who have been subject to inpatient psychiatric care.

Koslander T(1), Rönning S(2)(3), Magnusson S(2)(3), Wiklund Gustin L(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Integrierte Psychiatrie Winterthur - Zürcher Unterland, Winterthur,
Switzerland.
(2)School of Health, Care and Social Welfare, Mälardalen University, Västerås,
Sweden.
(3)Division of Psychiatry, County Council of Dalarna, Falun, Sweden.
(4)Department of Health and Care Sciences, UiT/The Arctic University of Norway,
Tromsø, Norway.

AIMS: To describe lived experiences of spirituality from the perspective of
people who have been subject to inpatient psychiatric care and to interpret these
experiences from an understanding of health as dialectical.
METHODS: After approval from a regional ethical board, eleven participants were
recruited from two organisations for people with mental health problems.
Participants were asked to narrate about spiritual experiences and occasions
where such experiences had come close. The transcribed interviews were analysed
by means of a phenomenological hermeneutical approach.
FINDINGS: A structural analysis of the text resulted in three themes; perceiving 
the presence of something extra mundane, making sense of reality and struggling
for acceptance. The comprehensive understanding highlights spiritual experiences 
as going beyond religion, even though religious experiences appear as part of it.
These experiences can indeed be a resource contributing to experiences of hope,
connectedness, meaning and coherence in life. However, they can also give rise to
doubt, anxiety and feelings of loneliness and hopelessness. Rather than
understanding spiritual experiences as being either 'good' or 'bad', we could
approach spirituality as something that is always present in alternate and
inter-related forms. Metaphorically, this could be understood as a 'near-life
experience', summarising participants' experiences related to their struggle with
issues related to suffering and health which are simultaneously present.
CONCLUSIONS: If psychiatric nurses could approach this complexity and, without
being judgemental, explore seemingly positive and negative experiences of
spirituality as dialectically related to each other, rather than viewing them as 
either resources or problems, this could contribute to insiderness care and
hopefully also support people who struggle with these experiences to seek help
when needed.

© 2020 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Caring Sciences published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Nordic College of Caring Science.

DOI: 10.1111/scs.12863 
PMID: 32329109 


388. Women Birth. 2021 May;34(3):266-277. doi: 10.1016/j.wombi.2020.03.006. Epub 2020 
Apr 20.

Salutogenic qualities of midwifery care: A best-fit framework synthesis.

Mathias LA(1), Davis D(2), Ferguson S(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Canberra, Discipline of Midwifery, Faculty of Health, Building
10 B, University Dr, Bruce ACT 2617, Australia. Electronic address:
u3117793@uni.canberra.edu.au.
(2)University of Canberra, ACT Government Health Directorate, Australia.
(3)University of Canberra, Discipline of Midwifery, Faculty of Health, Building
10 B, University Dr, Bruce ACT 2617, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Although midwifery care is wellness-based and promotes normal
physiology, it exists within a medical model that focuses on risk aversion and
disease prevention. Salutogenic theory could provide an alternative approach to
midwifery care, supporting health-promoting factors, rather than solely avoiding 
adverse events.
AIMS: The aim of this study was to explore women's experiences of their midwifery
care and identify salutogenic aspects of midwifery care.
METHODS: Best-fit framework synthesis was used to analyse 349 quotes about
women's experiences of midwifery care from 31 qualitative studies in ten
high-income countries. Key salutogenic concepts of comprehensibility,
manageability and meaningfulness were used as the basis for coding, and thematic 
analysis was used to expand and clarify the framework to best fit the data.
FINDINGS: Definitions for the salutogenic aspects of midwifery care were
developed. Comprehensibility (cognitive aspects of health): ways that midwives
help women increase predictability and preparation during childbearing through
apredictable caregiver, a predictable system and preparation for an unpredictable
experience. Manageability (behavioural aspects of health): ways that midwives
enhance and support a woman's internal resilience, adding extra support when
needed, and strengthen women's external resources through connections to family, 
community and specialist care. Meaningfulness (emotional/spiritual aspects of
health): ways that midwives encourage the commitment and engagement of
childbearing women by providing care through a personalised relationship, by
cultivating a woman's autonomy.
CONCLUSION: Findings of this study may be used to further research into ways that
salutogenic theory can bring a health and wellness-focused agenda to midwifery
policy and practice.

Copyright © 2020 Australian College of Midwives. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wombi.2020.03.006 
PMID: 32327385  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Apr 20;17(8). pii: E2829. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17082829.

Sense of Coherence, Compassionate Love and Coping in International Leaders during
the Transition into the Fourth Industrial Revolution.

Mayer CH(1)(2), Oosthuizen RM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial and Organisational Psychology, University of
Johannesburg, Johannesburg 2006, South Africa.
(2)Institut für therapeutische Kommunikation und Sprachgebrauch, European
University Viadrina, 15230 Frankfurt (Oder), Germany.
(3)Department of Industrial and Organisational Psychology, University of South
Africa, Pretoria 0002, South Africa.

Contemporary workplaces are influenced by rapid changes, high levels of
competition, increasing complexities and internationalisation processes. At the
edge of the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR), insecurities and anxieties are
high, and leaders are encouraged more than ever to lead employees with meaningful
vision and prudence in order to make use of employees' strengths, and ensure
mental health and well-being. The aim of this article is to present new insights 
into salutogenesis, particularly sense of coherence (SOC), compassionate love
(CL), and coping (C) in leaders with different cultural backgrounds. This study
strengthens the idea that CL is a coping mechanism. This coping mechanism can be 
used by leaders to establish a resilient and salutogenic organisations. This
article explores the subjective perspectives of 22 international leaders from
five different countries and their views regarding SOC, CL and C through a
qualitative research approach, using a qualitative online questionnaire for data 
collection and content analysis for data analysis. The findings on the
perspectives of leaders provide new and original insights into how SOC, CL and C 
are connected, and how these concepts contribute to healthy organisations which
are on their way to the transition into the 4IR. Conclusions are drawn.
Recommendations for future research and practice are given.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17082829 
PMCID: PMC7215339
PMID: 32326008  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Apr 18;17(8). pii: E2797. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17082797.

Hope, Loneliness and Sense of Coherence among Bereaved Parents.

Einav M(1)(2), Margalit M(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Behavioral Sciences Department, Peres Academic Center, Rechovot 7610202,
Israel.
(2)Behavioral Sciences Department, The Academic College of Tel-Aviv-Yaffa,
Tel-Aviv 6818218, Israel.
(3)School of Education, Tel Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 6997505, Israel.

Coping with the loss of a child is a challenging and difficult experience that
disrupts the lives of the surviving parents and the fabric of the family. Our
goal is to identify the factors that help bereaved parents cope with this loss
and introduce hope and future perspectives into their lives. Our sample consisted
of 81 parents (30 fathers and 51 mothers), who completed questionnaires on the
following topics: family climate, loneliness, sense of coherence and hope. In
addition, interviews were conducted with six parents to further clarify the
quantitative results. A moderated mediation model revealed that increased levels 
of loneliness among the parents predicted lower levels of hope. However, their
emotional resources in terms of their sense of coherence mediated this
relationship. In addition, the number of years since the loss moderated the
negative relationship between loneliness and the parents' emotional resources. It
can be concluded that the negative impact of loneliness on parents' sense of
coherence declined over time. The interviews conducted extend the understanding
of these results, as parents described their ability to continue with their lives
and identified their goals in terms of the hope theory, alongside their ongoing
pain. Finally, the therapeutic implications of the results we obtained are
discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17082797 
PMCID: PMC7216278
PMID: 32325645  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Doc Ophthalmol. 2020 Dec;141(3):227-236. doi: 10.1007/s10633-020-09767-y. Epub
2020 Apr 22.

High myopic patients with and without foveoschisis: morphological and functional 
characteristics.

Nebbioso M(1), Lambiase A(2), Gharbiya M(1), Bruscolini A(1), Alisi L(1),
Bonfiglio V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome, p. le A. Moro 5,
00185, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome, p. le A. Moro 5,
00185, Rome, Italy. alessandro.lambiase@uniroma1.it.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Catania, Via S. Sofia 76, 95100,
Catania, Italy.

PURPOSE: Myopic foveoschisis (MF) is characterized by the splitting of the
retinal layers in the fovea of patients with high myopia (HM). MF may progress
into foveal detachment or macular hole formation with consequent loss of central 
vision. The aim of this study is to investigate morphological and functional
changes of the macular region in myopic subjects with and without foveoschisis.
DESIGN: Observational, cross-sectional, comparative study.
METHODS: Forty-eight patients with HM and 24 healthy controls were evaluated by
spectral domain-optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT), multifocal
electroretinography (mfERG) and microperimetry (MP-1) tests to assess macular
thickness, functionality and sensitivity values, respectively. The results of the
diagnostic examinations were compared between three groups: HM patients with MF
(N = 24), HM patients without MF (N = 24) and control group (CG) (N = 24). All
statistical analyses were performed with STATA 14.0 (Collage Station, Texas,
USA). One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey's post hoc test was 
used to analyze differences between groups unless specified; p values < 0.05 were
considered as statistically significant. Gender distribution was compared by the 
Chi square test.
RESULTS: The statistical analysis with one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's post hoc
test showed a significant increase in macular thickness in HM patients with MF
when compared to both HM patients without MF and CG. Morphological changes were
associated with functional impairment as demonstrated by the significant decrease
in amplitude of the P1 wave and MP-1 sensitivity (p < 0.05), according to the
anatomical landmarks.
CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that the morphological changes observed in the
central retina of HM patients with MF are associated with functional alterations.
High-tech diagnostic tests such as SD-OCT, mfERG and MP-1 could be useful for
management in complications of MF.

DOI: 10.1007/s10633-020-09767-y 
PMID: 32323040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


392. PLoS One. 2020 Apr 22;15(4):e0231415. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0231415.
eCollection 2020.

What matters to women in the postnatal period: A meta-synthesis of qualitative
studies.

Finlayson K(1), Crossland N(2), Bonet M(3), Downe S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research in Childbirth and Health (ReaCH) group, University of Central
Lancashire, Preston, United Kingdom.
(2)Faculty of Health and Wellbeing, University of Central Lancashire, Preston,
United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Reproductive Health and Research, UNDP/UNFPA/UNICEF/WHO/World
Bank Special Programme of Research, Development and Research Training in Human
Reproduction (HRP), World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.

INTRODUCTION: The postnatal period is an underserved aspect of maternity care.
Guidelines for postnatal care are not usually informed by what matters to the
women who use it. This qualitative systematic review was undertaken to identify
what matters to women in the postnatal period, to inform the scope of a new World
Health Organization (WHO) postnatal guideline.
METHODS: We searched MEDLINE, CINAHL, PsycINFO, POPLINE, Global Index Medicus,
EMBASE, LILACS, AJOL, and reference lists of eligible studies published January
2000-July 2019, reporting qualitative data on women's beliefs, expectations, and 
values relating to the postnatal period.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Author findings were extracted, coded and
synthesised using techniques derived from thematic synthesis. Confidence in the
quality, coherence, relevance and adequacy of data underpinning the resulting
findings was assessed using GRADE-CERQual.
RESULTS: We included 36 studies from 15 countries, representing the views of more
than 800 women. Confidence in most results was moderate to high. What mattered to
women was a positive postnatal experience where they were able to adapt to their 
new self-identity and develop a sense of confidence and competence as a mother;
adjust to changes in their intimate and family relationships, including their
relationship to their baby; navigate ordinary physical and emotional challenges; 
and experience the dynamic achievement of personal growth as they adjust to the
'new normal' of motherhood and parenting in their own cultural context.
CONCLUSION: This review provides evidence that what matters to women in the
postnatal period is achieving positive motherhood (including maternal
self-esteem, competence, and autonomy), as well as fulfilling adaptation to
changed intimate and family relationships, and (re)gaining health and wellbeing
for both their baby, and themselves. Where this process is optimal, it also
results in joy, self-confidence, and an enhanced capacity to thrive in the new
integrated identity of 'woman and mother'.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0231415 
PMCID: PMC7176084
PMID: 32320424  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


393. Restor Neurol Neurosci. 2020;38(3):223-237. doi: 10.3233/RNN-190970.

Mesenchymal stem cell surgery, rescue and regeneration in retinitis pigmentosa:
clinical and rehabilitative prognostic aspects.

Limoli PG(1), Limoli CSS(1), Morales MU(2), Vingolo EM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Low Vision Research Centre of Milan, p.zza Sempione 3, Milan, Italy.
(2)Division of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical 
Centre, Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Sense Organs, Faculty of Medicine and Odontology, Sapienza
University of Rome, p.le A. Moro, Rome, Italy.

PURPOSE: To assess whether treatment with the Limoli Retinal Restoration
Technique (LRRT) can be performed in patients with retinitis pigmentosa (RP),
grafting the autologous cells in a deep scleral pocket above the choroid of each 
eye to exert their beneficial effect on the residual retinal cells.
METHODS: The patients were subjected to a complete ophthalmological examination, 
including best corrected visual acuity (BCVA), close-up visus measurements,
spectral domain-optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT), microperimetry (MY), and
electroretinography (ERG). Furthermore, the complete ophthalmological examination
was carried out at baseline (T0) and at 6 months (T180) after surgery. The
Shapiro-Wilk test was used to assess the normality of distribution of the
investigated parameters. A mixed linear regression model was used to analyse the 
difference in all the studied parameters at T0 and T180, and to compare the mean 
change between the two groups. All statistical analyses were performed with STATA
14.0 (Collage Station, Texas, USA).
RESULTS: LRRT treatment was performed in 34 eyes of 25 RP patients recruited for 
the study. The eyes were classified in two groups on the basis of foveal
thickness (FT) assessed by SD-OCT: 14 eyes in Group A (FT≤190μm) and the
remaining 20 ones in Group B (FT > 190μm). Although it had not reached the
statistical significance, Group B showed a better improvement in BCVA, residual
close-up visus and sensitivity than Group A.
CONCLUSIONS: Previous studies have described the role of LRRT in slowing down
retinal degenerative diseases. Consequently, this surgical procedure could
improve the clinical and rehabilitative prognostic parameters in RP patients. On 
the other hand, further clinical research and studies with longer follow-up will 
be needed to evaluate its efficacy.

DOI: 10.3233/RNN-190970 
PMCID: PMC7504992
PMID: 32310198 


394. Contemp Clin Dent. 2019 Apr-Jun;10(2):197-202. doi: 10.4103/ccd.ccd_648_18.

Caregiver's Sense of Coherence: A Predictor of Oral Health-Related Behaviors of
Autistic Children in India.

Shah A(1), Singh S(1), Ajithkrishnan CG(1), Kariya PB(2), Patel H(1), Ghosh A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health Dentistry, K. M. Shah Dental College and Hospital,
Sumandeep Vidyapeeth University, Waghodia, Gujarat, India.
(2)Department of Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry, K. M. Shah Dental College 
and Hospital, Sumandeep Vidyapeeth University, Waghodia, Gujarat, India.

Context: Sense of coherence (SOC) is hypothesized to be an important
psychological factor that enables people to cope with stressors and successfully 
maintain and improve health.
Aim: This study was conducted with the aim to investigate the relationship
between oral health-related behaviors of autistic children and SOC of their
caregivers.
Settings and Design: An Exploratory cross sectional study was conducted to
investigate the association of oral health-related behaviors of autistic children
and their primary caregiver's sense of coherence in Vadodara city, Gujarat.
Methods and Results: A cross-sectional study was conducted on a sample of 58
autistic children and their caregivers. The Gujarati version of Antonovsky's SOC 
scale (13 items) was employed to assess the caregiver's SOC. The outcome
variables were the child's oral health-related behaviors, including frequency of 
sugary snack intake, toothbrushing frequency, and utilization of dental service.
Statistical Analysis Used: Multiple logistic regression was used to analyze the
relationship between the variables.
Results: Autistic children whose mothers (as caregivers) had higher SOC scores
had a lower frequency of sugary snack intake and greater utilization of dental
services compared with the children whose mothers had lower SOC scores. The other
measures of oral health-related behaviors of the child were not significantly
associated with the caregiver's SOC.
Conclusion: Oral health-related behaviors of autistic children, namely sugary
snack intake frequency, toothbrushing frequency, and utilization of dental
services, were associated with the SOC of their mothers.

Copyright: © 2020 Contemporary Clinical Dentistry.

DOI: 10.4103/ccd.ccd_648_18 
PMCID: PMC7145257
PMID: 32308277 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


395. Nurs Philos. 2020 Jul;21(3):e12300. doi: 10.1111/nup.12300. Epub 2020 Apr 20.

A critique of Paulo Freire's perspective on human nature to inform the
construction of theoretical underpinnings for research.

Sanders K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Foundation of Nursing Studies, London, UK.
(2)Queen Margaret University, Edinburgh, Scotland.

This article presents a critique of Paulo Freire's philosophical perspective on
human nature in the context of a doctoral research study to explore "muchness" or
nurses' subjective experience of well-being; and demonstrates how this critique
has informed the refinement of the theoretical principles used to inform research
methodology and methods. Engaging in philosophical groundwork is essential for
research coherence and integrity. Through this groundwork, largely informed by
Freire's critical pedagogy and his ideas on humanization, I recognized the need
to clarify my understanding of the concepts of persons and personhood and how
this related to Freire's use of the term human beings. This clarification process
is essential to ensure congruence between the theoretical principles that I draw 
from his work and my beliefs about persons, personhood and person-centredness.
The article begins with a brief introduction to the research, followed by an
overview of Freire's philosophical perspectives, and subsequently, the critique
process is presented and discussed. This process involved engaging with the vast 
literature and debates about what it means to be a person, to make sense of the
often complex and contradictory arguments. Eventually, three headings emerged
that helped me to frame my evolving understanding: Our species: human beings; The
kind that we are: human nature; and This person that I am: personhood. Through
this process of exploration, I recognized that Freire's perspective on human
nature (a) foregrounded cognitive rationality, which presented itself as a
limitation when considering my ontological beliefs and the focus of my research, 
leading me to draw on the work of Mark Johnson and his ideas about embodiment to 
help me to further develop my theoretical principles; (b) focused on the
"collective" rather than individuals, which is a shortcoming in relation to
person-centred research that acknowledges the uniqueness of participants.

© 2020 The Authors. Nursing Philosophy published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/nup.12300 
PMID: 32307897  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Health Psychol. 2020 Apr 18:1359105320914062. doi: 10.1177/1359105320914062.
[Epub ahead of print]

Perception of family sense of coherence during parental transition: A qualitative
study.

Ngai FW(1), Chan PS(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, HKSAR.

This study described the perspectives and interplay of factors affecting the
family sense of coherence of Chinese couples during the perinatal period. We
adopted a grounded theory approach and conducted semi-structured interviews with 
36 Chinese couples during pregnancy and at 2-3 months postpartum. Four major
themes emerged involving meaningfulness, comprehensibility, and manageability of 
new parenthood and factors affecting the family sense of coherence. The strong
sense of family unity and harmony embedded in the Confucian philosophy and the
collective coping, in particular the strong social support network, seemed to
contribute to couple's experience of new parenthood as meaningful,
comprehensible, and manageable.

DOI: 10.1177/1359105320914062 
PMID: 32306765 


397. BMC Fam Pract. 2020 Apr 15;21(1):63. doi: 10.1186/s12875-020-01131-y.

Examining Interprofessional teams structures and processes in the implementation 
of a primary care intervention (Health TAPESTRY) for older adults using
normalization process theory.

Valaitis R(1), Cleghorn L(2), Dolovich L(2), Agarwal G(2), Gaber J(2), Mangin
D(2), Oliver D(2), Parascandalo F(2), Ploeg J(3), Risdon C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Aging Community and Health Research Unit, School of Nursing, McMaster
University, HSC 3N25, 1280 Main Street West, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON,
L8S4K1, Canada. valaitis@mcmaster.ca.
(2)Department of Family Medicine, McMaster University, David Braley Health
Sciences Centre, 100 Main Street West, 5th floor, Hamilton, ON, L8P 1H6, Canada.
(3)Aging Community and Health Research Unit, School of Nursing, McMaster
University, HSC 3N25, 1280 Main Street West, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON,
L8S4K1, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Many countries are engaged in primary care reforms to support older
adults who are living longer in the community. Health Teams Advancing Patient
Experience: Strengthening Quality [Health TAPESTRY] is a primary care
intervention aimed at supporting older adults that involves trained volunteers,
interprofessional teams, technology, and system navigation. This paper examines
implementation of Health TAPESTRY in relation to interprofessional teamwork
including volunteers.
METHODS: This study applied Normalization Process Theory (NPT) and used a
descriptive qualitative approach [1] embedded in a mixed-methods, pragmatic
randomized controlled trial. It was situated in two primary care practice sites
in a large urban setting in Ontario, Canada. Focus groups and interviews were
conducted with primary care providers, clinical managers, administrative
assistants, volunteers, and a volunteer coordinator. Data was collected at
4 months (June-July 2015) and 12 months (February-March 2016) after intervention 
start-up. Patients were interviewed at the end of the six-month intervention.
Field notes were taken at weekly huddle meetings.
RESULTS: Overall, 84 participants were included in 17 focus groups and 13
interviews; 24 field notes were collected. Themes were organized under four NPT
constructs of implementation: 1) Coherence- (making sense/understanding of the
program's purpose/value) generating comprehensive assessments of older adults;
strengthening health promotion, disease prevention, and self-management;
enhancing patient-focused care; strengthening interprofessional care delivery;
improving coordination of health and community services. 2) Cognitive
Participation- (enrolment/buy-in) tackling new ways of working; attaining role
clarity. 3) Collective Action- (enactment/operationalizing) changing team
processes; reconfiguring resources. 4) Reflective Monitoring- (appraisal)
improving teamwork and collaboration; reconfiguring roles and processes.
CONCLUSIONS: This study contributes key strategies for effective implementation
of interventions involving interprofessional primary care teams. Findings
indicate that regular communication among all team members, the development of
procedures and/or protocols to support team processes, and ongoing review and
feedback are critical to implementation of innovations involving primary care
teams.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, no. NCT02283723 November 5, 2014.
Prospectively registered.

DOI: 10.1186/s12875-020-01131-y 
PMCID: PMC7160930
PMID: 32295524  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Caries Res. 2020;54(2):176-184. doi: 10.1159/000506438. Epub 2020 Apr 15.

Clinical Consequences of Untreated Dental Caries, Individual Characteristics, and
Environmental Factors on Self-Reported Oral Health Measures in Adolescents: A
Follow-Up Prevalence Study.

Silva MP(1), Vettore MV(2), Rebelo MAB(1), Rebelo Vieira JM(3), Herkrath APCQ(1),
Queiroz AC(1), Herkrath FJ(4)(5), Pereira JV(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, Federal University of Amazonas, Manaus, Brazil.
(2)School of Dentistry, Department of Social and Preventive Dentistry, Federal
University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil, mariovettore@gmail.com.
(3)School of Dentistry, Department of Social and Preventive Dentistry, Federal
University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(4)Instituto Leônidas e Maria Deane, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Manaus, Brazil.
(5)Superior School of Health Sciences, Amazonas State University, Manaus, Brazil.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: This study evaluated the relationships of clinical consequences 
of untreated dental caries, individual characteristics, and environmental factors
on self-reported oral health measures in adolescents.
METHODS: A follow-up prevalence study was conducted involving 406 twelve-year-old
adolescents selected from public schools in the eastern area of the city of
Manaus, Brazil. Baseline data included clinical consequences of untreated caries 
(PUFA/pufa index), DMFT, sociodemographic characteristics (sex, parental
schooling, and family income), psychosocial factors (sense of coherence [SOC-13
scale], oral health beliefs and self-esteem [Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale]), and
social support (SSA questionnaire). Oral health-related quality of life (OHRQoL
[CPQ11-14]) and self-rated oral health were assessed at the 6-month follow-up.
Structural equation modelling was used to explore the relationships between
variables according to the Wilson and Cleary model.
RESULTS: The prevalence of PUFA/pufa was 17.8% and mean DMFT was 1.5. The number 
of teeth with clinical consequences of untreated caries predicted poor self-rated
oral health at the 6-month follow-up. Low parental schooling predicted low family
income and clinical consequences of untreated dental caries. Psychosocial factors
predicted OHRQoL directly and self-rated oral health indirectly. OHRQoL was
linked to self-rated oral health. Clinical consequences of untreated dental
caries mediated the relationship of parental schooling with OHRQoL and self-rated
oral health. OHRQoL mediated the relationship of psychosocial factors and sex
with self-rated oral health. Clinical consequences of untreated dental caries was
associated with adolescents' self-rated oral health. Furthermore, the former was 
an important mediator on the link between low parental education and adolescents'
self-reported oral health measures.
CONCLUSIONS: Socioeconomic status, psychosocial factors, and social support were 
related to OHRQoL and self-rated oral health via direct and indirect pathways.

© 2020 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000506438 
PMID: 32294648  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


399. PLoS One. 2020 Apr 15;15(4):e0230956. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0230956.
eCollection 2020.

Basic self-disturbances are associated with Sense of Coherence in patients with
psychotic disorders.

Svendsen IH(1)(2), Øie MG(3)(4), Møller P(5), Nelson B(6)(7), Melle I(8)(9), Haug
E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Acute Psychiatry and Psychosis Treatment, Division of Mental
Health, Innlandet Hospital Trust, Reinsvoll, Norway.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Blindern, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Division of Research, Innlandet Hospital Trust, Brumunddal, Norway.
(5)Department of Mental Health Research and Development, Division of Mental
Health and Addiction, Vestre Viken Hospital Trust, Drammen, Norway.
(6)Orygen, The National Centre of Excellence in Youth Mental Health, The
University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(7)Centre for Youth Mental Health, The University of Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.
(8)NORMENT KG Jebsen Centre for Psychosis Research, Institute of Clinical
Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(9)Division of Mental Health and Addiction, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway.

BACKGROUND: The Sense of Coherence (SOC) theory gives a possible explanation of
how people can experience subjective good health despite severe illness. Basic
self-disturbances (BSDs) are subtle non-psychotic disturbances that may
destabilize the person's sense of self, identity, corporeality, and the overall
'grip' of the world.
AIM: Our objective was to investigate associations between BSDs and SOC in
patients with psychotic disorders.
DESIGN: This is a cross-sectional study of 56 patients diagnosed with psychotic
disorders inside and outside the schizophrenia spectrum (35 schizophrenia, 13
bipolar, and eight other psychoses). SOC was measured using Antonovsky's 13-item 
SOC questionnaire, and BSDs were assessed using the Examination of Anomalous
Self-Experience (EASE) manual. Diagnosis, symptoms, and social and occupational
performance were assessed using standardized clinical instruments.
RESULTS: We found a statistically significant correlation (r = ) between high
levels of BSDs and low levels of SOC (r = -0.64/p<0.001). This association was
not influenced by diagnostics, clinical symptoms or level of functioning in
follow-up multivariate analyses.
CONCLUSION: A statistically significant association between BSDs and SOC
indicates that the presence and level of self-disturbances may influence the
person's ability to experience life as comprehensive, manageable and meaningful. 
However, the cross-sectional nature of the study precludes conclusions regarding 
the direction of this association.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0230956 
PMCID: PMC7159222
PMID: 32294097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


400. Support Care Cancer. 2020 Dec;28(12):5973-5982. doi: 10.1007/s00520-020-05434-9. 
Epub 2020 Apr 13.

Fear of cancer recurrence in haematological cancer patients: exploring
socio-demographic, psychological, existential and disease-related factors.

Borreani C(1), Alfieri S(2), Farina L(3), Bianchi E(1), Corradini P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Psychology Unit, Fondazione IRCSS "Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori",
Via Giacomo Venezian 1, 20133, Milan, Italy.
(2)Clinical Psychology Unit, Fondazione IRCSS "Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori",
Via Giacomo Venezian 1, 20133, Milan, Italy. sara.alfieri@istitutotumori.mi.it.
(3)Haematological Unit, Fondazione IRCSS "Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori", Milan, 
Italy.

PURPOSE: This study aims to explore the relation between the dimension of fear of
cancer recurrence (FCR) in haematological cancer patients relapse-free for at
least 2 years and socio-demographic, related to the disease, psychological and
existential factors.
METHODS: A sample of 75 haematological cancer patients agreed to participate in
the study through a self-reported online questionnaire (51.9% males). A total of 
70.1% had a low recurrence risk. The questionnaire included socio-demographic
(gender, age, civil status, level of education and number of children), related
to the disease (diagnosis, therapeutic line and years since diagnosis),
psychological (anxiety and depression), existential (purpose in life; PIL)
factors and Fear of Cancer Recurrence Concerns Inventory (FCRI). Simple and
multiple linear regressions were conducted for the analyses, and we performed
some preliminary analysis on the reliability of the FCRI.
FINDINGS: A total of 53.3% of participants showed clinical levels of FCR on the
severity dimension, which was higher than found in previous research in other
cancer patients. The coping strategies, triggers, severity and psychological
distress dimensions showed higher mean values. Women, patients with indolent
non-Hodgkin lymphomas, years since diagnosis, anxiety and purpose in life are
significantly related to one or more dimensions of FCRI.
IMPLICATIONS: It is important that the clinicians have at their disposal multiple
possibilities to help patients cope with haematological cancer. If future
research will confirm the results of this study, the negative correlation between
FCR and PIL can suggest indications for planning interventions based on a
salutogenic approach.

DOI: 10.1007/s00520-020-05434-9 
PMID: 32285261  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Mayo Clin Proc Innov Qual Outcomes. 2020 Feb 17;4(2):190-202. doi:
10.1016/j.mayocpiqo.2019.11.002. eCollection 2020 Apr.

Capacity Coaching: A Focused Ethnographic Evaluation in Clinical Practice.

Boehmer KR(1), Thota A(1), Organick P(1), Havens K(2)(3), Shah ND(4).

Author information: 
(1)Knowledge and Evaluation Research Unit, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(2)Kern Institute, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI.
(3)Women's Health Clinic, Milwaukee VA Medical Center (Zablocki), WI.
(4)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.

Objective: To qualitatively evaluate the implementation of Capacity Coaching, an 
intervention to address the work patients must undertake to manage their
conditions, implemented as a quality improvement pilot in 1 of 2 implementing US 
Department of Veterans Affairs medical centers.
Participants and Methods: Two Veterans Affairs medical centers in the Midwest
sought to implement Capacity Coaching as a quality improvement pilot in their
Patient-Aligned Care Teams for 6 months (April 1, 2017, through October 31,
2017). Following the pilot, we conducted a focused ethnographic evaluation
(on-site data collection, January 2-4, 2018), including interviews, a focus
group, and observations with staff at one site to assess the implementation of
capacity coaching. Data were analyzed inductively and findings were
cross-referenced with implementation theory.
Results: We found that implementation was feasible and achieved changes that were
aligned with reducing patient work and increasing capacity. We found that the key
facilitators for the implementation of this program were in participants making
sense of the intervention (coherence) and working collectively to enact the
program (collective action). The main challenges for the program were in planning
the work of implementation and enrolling a diverse coalition of staff to expand
referrals to the program (cognitive participation) and in evaluating the impact
of the program on outcomes that upper leadership was interested in (reflexive
monitoring).
Conclusion: Implementation of Capacity Coaching is feasible in clinical practice 
and may be a promising intervention for the care of chronic conditions. Further
research should focus on testing capacity coaching using these lessons learned.

© 2019 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. Published by Elsevier 
Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mayocpiqo.2019.11.002 
PMCID: PMC7140014
PMID: 32280930 


402. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Apr 8;17(7). pii: E2562. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17072562.

The Relationship between Dog Ownership, Psychopathological Symptoms and
Health-Benefitting Factors in Occupations at Risk for Traumatization.

Lass-Hennemann J(1), Schäfer SK(1), Sopp MR(1), Michael T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Saarland University, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.

Individuals working in high-risk occupations (e.g., emergency staff) are exposed 
to high levels of occupational stress including traumatic events.
Correspondingly, several studies report high rates of mental health problems
among these occupations. Pet ownership has been associated with better mental
health. However, to date a study on the association between pet ownership and
indicators of mental health in these occupations is missing. The present
cross-sectional survey (N = 580) investigated pet ownership, attachment to pets, 
health-benefitting factors (i.e., sense of coherence, trait-resilience, locus of 
control) and psychopathological symptoms (i.e., general mental health problems,
posttraumatic stress, burnout) in medical staff, police officers, and
firefighters. Dog owners and non-dog owners showed comparable levels of
psychopathological distress and health-benefitting factors. Compared to cat
owners, dog owners demonstrated stronger emotional attachment to their pet.
Moreover, a stronger attachment was also linked to higher levels of
psychopathological symptoms and lower levels of health-benefitting factors.
However, the relationship between attachment to pets and health-benefitting
factors could be explained by their overlap with psychopathological symptom
levels. Overall, our findings are not in line with the notion that pet ownership 
generally has a health-benefitting effect. Future studies need to investigate
circumstances that modulate positive effects of pet ownership.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17072562 
PMCID: PMC7178020
PMID: 32276495  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Bundesgesundheitsblatt Gesundheitsforschung Gesundheitsschutz. 2020
May;63(5):577-585. doi: 10.1007/s00103-020-03133-8.

[Self-healing in health-care: Using the example of mind-body medicine].

[Article in German]

Esch T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsambulanz für Integrative Gesundheitsversorgung und Naturheilkunde 
(UnIG), Institut für Integrative Gesundheitsversorgung und Gesundheitsförderung
(IGVF), Fakultät für Gesundheit/Department für Humanmedizin, Universität
Witten/Herdecke, Alfred-Herrhausen-Straße 44, 58448, Witten, Deutschland.
igvf@uni-wh.de.

Mind-body medicine (MBM) is based on the assumption that interactions between the
brain, mind, body, and behavior can be used to activate health-promoting pathways
towards better health. It includes behavioral medical approaches and techniques
in conjunction with exercise, relaxation, stress regulation, and nutrition. MBM
and MBM interventions are well-established in the US healthcare system. This also
includes an exploration of their underlying mechanisms. In Germany, too,
a growing body of interventions are now summarized under this generic term.In
this narrative review, the emergence of MBM is illuminated in the context of
historical developments as well as against the background of the meditation
research that has been emerging since the 1970s and the investigation of the
stress phenomenon. References to basic research including neurobiological
reward/placebo physiology are presented. Distinctions to psychotherapy are made
and an implementation framework is described.MBM is related to health promotion
and the therapy of chronic, especially lifestyle-related diseases. It is based on
the salutogenesis approach, i.e., a paradigm that seeks to explore and reinforce 
health determinants and resistance resources (individual resilience and coherence
factors) and strives to reduce stress. This approach corresponds to self-healing 
or self-care principles. Neurobiologically, it is associated with the placebo
effect. MBM interventions typically follow the BERN model
(behavior-exercise-relaxation-nutrition).As a facilitator of self-healing and
self-care, MBM can be professionally trained and empowered. For doing so, "health
promotion experts" are used.

DOI: 10.1007/s00103-020-03133-8 
PMID: 32274538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Cien Saude Colet. 2020 Mar;25(4):1491-1498. doi:
10.1590/1413-81232020254.31652017. Epub 2018 Aug 4.

Sense of coherence and impact of oral health on quality of life in adults and
elderly in Southern Brazil.

Davoglio RS(1), Fontanive VN(2), Oliveira MMC(3), Abegg C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina. R. 
Gov. Jorge Lacerda 3201. Araranguá  SC  Brasil. rosanedavoglio@gmail.com.
(2)Conceição Hospital Group. Porto Alegre  RS  Brasil.
(3)Saúde Coletiva, Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre.
Porto Alegre  RS  Brasil.
(4)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Saúde Coletiva, Universidade Federal do Rio
Grande do Sul. Porto Alegre  RS  Brasil.

This cross-sectional study aimed to investigate the association between the Sense
of Coherence and impact of oral health on the quality of life. Was conducted with
a sample of 720 individuals of both sexes, between the ages of 50 and 74 years,
selected through multistage proportional random sampling. The data collection
instruments used were: short version of the Sense of Coherence Scale (SOC-13),
Oral Impacts on Daily Performances (OIDP) questionnaire, oral clinical
examination and questionnaire containing socio demographic and use of dental
services information. Bivariate and multivariate analyses were performed through 
Poisson regression adjusted for robust variance, with level of significance p <
0.05. Oral impacts were reported by 416 participants (57.8%). In the adjusted
model, those with strong SOC were more likely of not having any impact when
compared with individuals with weak SOC (PR=1.30). Need for dental prosthesis was
also associated with the outcome, individuals who did not require prosthesis had 
less impact (PR=1.50). The findings showed that SOC is associated with OIDP,
supporting the hypothesis that individuals with strong SOC present a lower impact
of oral health on the quality of life, suggesting that SOC is a determinant that 
can provide protection against that impact.

DOI: 10.1590/1413-81232020254.31652017 
PMID: 32267449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Front Psychiatry. 2020 Mar 18;11:136. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00136. eCollection 
2020.

The Experience of Tinnitus and Its Interaction With Unique Life Histories-Life
Events, Trauma and Inner Resources Narrated by Patients With Tinnitus.

Erlandsson SI(1), Lundin L(1), Dauman N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social and Behavioral Science, University West, Trollhättan,
Sweden.
(2)Department of Psychology, CAPS-EA4050, University of Poitiers, Poitiers,
France.

Background: The challenges facing people with chronic tinnitus include finding
relief and rebuilding quality of life. However, previous traumatic episodes may
influence adjustment and prolong suffering. Recovery implies reducing aggravating
reactions and improving social roles, relationships and interests.
Self-narratives about living with tinnitus have not yet received the attention
they deserve in the research literature. Thus, the main goal of the present study
was to illustrate how tinnitus suffering interacts with the participants' unique 
life histories. Method: Four women and one man (ages 52-58) took part in the
study after consulting a special hearing clinic for annoying tinnitus. Criteria
for inclusion were that tinnitus was regarded as a problem with negative
consequences for quality of life. The participants should be willing to share how
the experience of tinnitus suffering interacts with their previous life story.
Narrative methodology was employed in order to achieve the goals of the study. We
used unstructured interviews with free conversation, which allowed for rich
narratives with full contextual meaning. Results: The findings, based on the
narrative analysis, revealed that three out of five participants presented a
regressive form of narrative indicating ongoing struggles beyond tinnitus itself,
which they were unable to bring to closure. For them, valued goals were
continuously thwarted by frustrating circumstances in their lives, either past
events or current unresolved issues. Progressive and stable narratives, as
identified in the other two participants, demonstrated values that rely on
others' attitude and understanding toward their suffering, in sharp contrast to
the regressive narratives. We suggest that a central issue in tinnitus
rehabilitation should be to help suffering patients to overcome unresolved
conflicts and thereby extend their ability for a fuller commitment in life.
Conclusion: Considering enduring tinnitus as a chronic condition, whose course is
likely to vary depending on the patient's general health status, an alteration of
progressive and stable narratives is likely to occur during the lifespan. A
progressive narrative shows similarities to the core construct of the
salutogenesis model of health promotion (1). In conclusion, a narrative approach 
in tinnitus rehabilitation can be health promoting by offering the patient the
opportunity to engage in storytelling, which in turn can increase
comprehensibility and a sense of coherence.

Copyright © 2020 Erlandsson, Lundin and Dauman.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00136 
PMCID: PMC7093576
PMID: 32256394 


406. Int J Qual Stud Health Well-being. 2020 Dec;15(1):1748942. doi:
10.1080/17482631.2020.1748942.

Salutogenesis as a theoretical framework for psychosocial rehabilitation: the
case of the Clubhouse model.

Fekete OR(1), Kinn LG(2), Larsen TMB(3), Langeland E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Welfare and Participation, Faculty of Health and Social
Sciences, Western Norway University of Applied Sciences and Department of Health 
Promotion and Development Faculty of Psychology, University of Bergen, Bergen,
Norway.
(2)Department of Welfare and Participation, Faculty of Health and Social
Sciences, Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Health Promotion and Development Faculty of Psychology,
University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(4)Department of Health and Caring Sciences, Faculty of Health and Social
Sciences, Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, Bergen, Norway.

Purpose: This study explored whether the holistic theory of salutogenesis may be 
a suitable theoretical framework for the Clubhouse model of psychosocial
rehabilitation, a pioneer among psychosocial rehabilitation programmes.Methods: A
systematic examination of elements of the Clubhouse model, as prescribed by the
Clubhouse standards, was performed within the context of the theory of
salutogenesis including its basic salutogenic orientation and the main concepts
of sense of coherence and resistance resources.Results: We found that several
standards and practices within the Clubhouse model can be understood as
applications of salutogenesis. We have hypothesized that the Clubhouse model
promotes peoples' sense of coherence and mental health. However, our
investigation also showed that, to enhance the recovery of Clubhouse members,
more explicitly incorporating some salutogenic principles, such as "appropriate
challenges" and "active adaptation as the ideal in treatment", may benefit
Clubhouse practice.Conclusions: The Clubhouse model of psychosocial
rehabilitation is very consistent with the salutogenic orientation and main
salutogenic concepts. The present study suggests that salutogenesis may be a
suitable theoretical framework for the Clubhouse model and possibly in the
psychosocial rehabilitation field in general.

DOI: 10.1080/17482631.2020.1748942 
PMCID: PMC7170324
PMID: 32249690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2020 Dec;101(12):2206-2218. doi:
10.1016/j.apmr.2020.02.012. Epub 2020 Mar 28.

Intervention Treatment for Myocardial Infarction With Tai Chi: A Systematic
Review and Meta-analysis.

Wu B(1), Ding Y(1), Zhong B(1), Jin X(1), Cao Y(2), Xu D(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Second Clinical Medical College, Guangzhou University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Guangdon, China.
(2)Department of Mathematical and Computer Sciences, Indiana University of
Pennsylvania, Indiana, PA. Electronic address: ycao@iup.edu.
(3)Cardiac Disease Treatment Center, Guangdong Hospital of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Guangdong, China.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy of Tai Chi (TC) in patients with myocardial
infarction and provide up-to-date evidence for its application.
DATA SOURCES: Three English databases (PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane Central
Register of Controlled Trials) and 3 Chinese databases (China Knowledge Resource 
Integrated, Wanfang, Weipu) were screened for the time period between January 1, 
1976 and May 31, 2019.
STUDY SELECTION: Seven randomized and controlled experiments were included.
DATA EXTRACTION: Two independent researchers under 2 independent advisors
extracted and classified the data from all relevant studies based on the
prespecified inclusion criteria and rules for data extraction.
DATA SYNTHESIS: A total of 615 patients were included in this study. The TC group
was comprised of 294 patients, and the control group included 261 patients. The
results revealed that TC has significant effects on the outcomes of the 6-minute 
walk (standardized mean difference, 1.30; 95% confidence interval, 0.50-2.11) and
left ventricular ejection fraction (standardized mean difference, 1; 95%
confidence interval, 0.43-1.57) compared with no or low-density exercise. Also,
TC positively affected the quality of life, pro-B type natriuretic peptide, and
short form-36. However, TC did not significantly affect activities of daily
living (P=.060), sense of coherence-13 (P=.057) and N-terminal-pro-brain
natriuretic peptide (P=.081). A moderate to high heterogeneity was observed
across all comparisons.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with no exercise or other types of low-intensity physical
activities, TC improved the outcome of the 6-minute walk, left ventricular
ejection fraction, quality of life, and short form-36 scores, but reduced the
outcome of pro-B type natriuretic peptide in patients with myocardial infarction.
Therefore, TC could be an effective exercise option for cardiac rehabilitation.
More research should be done to identify the effects of TC on academic
functioning and to determine ways of motivating patients to use preventive TC
interventions.

Copyright © 2020 American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apmr.2020.02.012 
PMID: 32234412  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2021 Feb;30(2):313-325. doi:
10.1007/s00787-020-01517-4. Epub 2020 Mar 30.

Ten-year changes in the psychosocial well-being, psychopathology, substance use, 
suicidality, bullying, and sense of coherence of 18-year-old males: a Finnish
population-based time-trend study.

Kronström K(1)(2), Multimäki P(1), Ristkari T(2), Parkkola K(3), Sillanmäki L(2),
Sourander A(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adolescent Psychiatry, Turku University Hospital, Hospital
District of Southwest Finland, Turku, Finland.
(2)Research Centre for Child Psychiatry, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(3)Navy Command Finland, Turku, Finland.
(4)Research Centre for Child Psychiatry, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
andsou@utu.fi.
(5)Department of Child Psychiatry, Turku University Hospital, Hospital District
of Southwest Finland, Turku, Finland. andsou@utu.fi.

We studied Finnish 18-year-old males attending obligatory military call-up
assessments in 1999 (n = 2340) and 2009 (n = 4309) on time-trend changes in
psychosocial well-being, psychopathology, substance use, suicidality, bullying,
and sense of coherence. Subjects filled in questionnaires, including the Young
Adult Self-Report (YASR) for psychopathology and the Orientation to Life
Questionnaire (SOC-13) for sense of coherence. The prevalence of minor mental
health problems in the last 6 months decreased from 22.3% in 1999 to 18.6% in
2009 (OR 0.8, 95% CI 0.7-0.9), whereas severe mental health problems remained
stable. Suicidal thoughts decreased from 5.7 to 3.7% (OR 0.6, 95% CI 0.5-0.8).
The use of illicit drugs decreased from 6.0 to 4.7% (OR 0.8, 95% CI 0.6-0.95),
but being drunk at least once a week increased from 10.3 to 13.4% (OR 1.3, 95% CI
1.0-1.5). Attention problems increased in YASR syndrome domains (mean score 2.9
vs 3.2, p < 0.001) and so did somatic complains (mean score 1.7 vs 1.9,
p = 0.005). The SOC-13 scores remained stable. The percentage of males who had
studied during the past 6 months increased from 91.4 to 93.4% (OR 1.3, 95% CI
1.1-1.6), while being employed decreased from 64.9 to 49.4% (OR 0.5, 95% CI
0.5-0.6). The positive findings included reductions in the prevalence of suicidal
thoughts and the use of illicit drugs, but being drunk at least once a week
increased. Self-reported somatic problems and attention problems increased.
Despite changes in society and family structures, there were only minor overall
changes in psychopathology.

DOI: 10.1007/s00787-020-01517-4 
PMCID: PMC7932936
PMID: 32232581  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Soc Theory Health. 2020;18(1):16-32. doi: 10.1057/s41285-019-00103-2. Epub 2019
Apr 11.

Healing Health Care: From Sick Care Towards Salutogenic Healing Systems.

Fries CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sociology and Criminology, University of Manitoba, 317 Isbister 
Building, Winnipeg, MB R3T 2N2 Canada.

Aaron Antonovsky's salutogenic model is starting to impact health promotion at
the level of theory and research. However, the benefits of Antonovsky's theory
for population health promotion practices and health care restructuring are
unrealized. This analysis uses the definition of health derived from complexity
science as a lifelong, multidimensional adaptive process comprised of
intersecting biological, psychological, social, environmental, and spiritual
systems as a starting point for a salutogenic analysis of formal healthcare.
Following Antonovsky's criticism of contemporary healthcare as resting upon a
pathogenic paradigm, I outline four general shortcomings associated with the
pathogenic approach to healthcare. The basic elements of a healthcare system
designed according to principles derived from Antonovsky's salutogenic model of
health are then presented. It is argued that Antonovsky's theory offers a
productive basis for conceptualizing health and healthcare systems in that it
allows us to grasp that debates between population health promotion and providing
medical care, are, at their root, unproductive debates predicated on a false
dichotomy. A salutogenic healthcare system is one which pays credence to the
nested complexity of human health and strives to strike an adaptive balance
between health production and the provision of medical care.

© Springer Nature Limited 2019.

DOI: 10.1057/s41285-019-00103-2 
PMCID: PMC7099730
PMID: 32226316 


410. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Mar 25;17(7). pii: E2212. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17072212.

What Protects Youth Residential Caregivers from Burning Out? A Longitudinal
Analysis of Individual Resilience.

Kind N(1), Bürgin D(1), Fegert JM(2), Schmid M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University Basel, Psychiatric University
Hospital Basel, Wilhelm Klein-Strasse 27, 4002 Basel, Switzerland.
(2)University Hospital Ulm, Department for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and
Psychotherapy, Steinhövelstrasse 5, 89075 Ulm, Germany.

Background: Professional caregivers are exposed to multiple stressors and have
high burnout rates; however, not all individuals are equally susceptible. We
investigated the association between resilience and burnout in a Swiss population
of professional caregivers working in youth residential care. Methods: Using a
prospective longitudinal study design, participants (n = 159; 57.9% women)
reported on burnout symptoms and sense of coherence (SOC), self-efficacy and
self-care at four annual sampling points. The associations of individual
resilience measures and sociodemographic variables, work-related and personal
stressors, and burnout symptoms were assessed. Cox proportional hazards
regressions were calculated to compute hazard ratios over the course of three
years. Results: Higher SOC, self-efficacy and self-care were related to lower
burnout symptoms in work-related and personal domains. Higher SOC and
self-efficacy were reported by older caregivers and by those with children. All
three resilience measures were highly correlated. A combined model analysis
weakened the protective effect of self-efficacy, leaving only SOC and self-care
negatively associated with burnout. Conclusion: This longitudinal analysis
suggests that SOC and self-caring behaviour in particular protect against
burnout. Our findings could have implications for promoting self-care practices, 
as well as cultivating a meaningful, comprehensible and manageable professional
climate in all facets of institutional care.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17072212 
PMCID: PMC7178075
PMID: 32218385  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author Contributions: Conceptualization, N.K. and
D.B.; Formal analysis, D.B.; Funding acquisition, M.S.; Methodology, M.S.;
Supervision, M.S.; Writing–original draft, N.K. and D.B.; Writing—review &
editing, N.K., D.B., J.M.F. and M.S. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.


411. BMC Public Health. 2020 Mar 24;20(1):386. doi: 10.1186/s12889-020-08531-w.

Psychological resources in adolescence and the association with labour market
participation in early adulthood: a prospective cohort study.

Jensen JD(1), Andersen JH(2), Winding TN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Ramboll Management Consulting, Stakeholder Intelligence, Olof Palmes Allé 22, 
8200, Aarhus, Denmark.
(2)Department of Occupational Medicine, Danish Ramazzini Centre, University
Research Clinic, Regional Hospital West Jutland, Gl. Landevej 61, 7400, Herning, 
Denmark.
(3)Department of Occupational Medicine, Danish Ramazzini Centre, University
Research Clinic, Regional Hospital West Jutland, Gl. Landevej 61, 7400, Herning, 
Denmark. trwind@rm.dk.

BACKGROUND: Young adults at the age of 25-29 in Denmark have the highest
unemployment rate and are at higher risk of labour market marginalization.
Exclusion from the labour market may have negative individual consequences on
mental and physical health and can lead to increasing societal expenditures due
to social benefits. It is important to understand what factors determine or
protect against early labour market marginalization. The aim of the present study
was to investigate the association between psychological resources in adolescence
and labour market participation in early adulthood, and whether the associations 
differed by gender.
METHODS: This prospective cohort study used questionnaire data collected through 
the West Jutland Cohort study in 2004 and 2007. The study population (N = 2982)
consisted of people born in 1989 and living in the county of Ringkjoebing at
baseline in 2004. Outcome was dichotomized as +/- 12 months of passive labour
market participation during the age of 25-29. Psychological resources were
measured as self-esteem, sense of coherence and mastery. Logistic regression
analyses were performed to investigate the associations between psychological
resources and labour market participation.
RESULTS: Results indicated associations between high levels of mastery or sense
of coherence in adolescence and high labour market participation in early
adulthood. The strongest associations were observed for females with a medium
(OR: 1.9, 95% CI: 1.3-2.8) or high level (OR: 1.6, 95% CI: 1.0-2.4) of mastery or
a high level of sense of coherence (OR: 1.6 95% CI: 1.0-2.4) at age 15 and for
males with a medium (OR: 2.7, 95% CI: 1.5-3.8) or high (OR: 1.9, 95% CI: 1.1-3.5)
level of mastery or a high level of sense of coherence (OR: 1.7, 95% CI: 0.9-3.1)
at age 18.
CONCLUSION: The results of the present study indicate associations between a high
level of sense of coherence or mastery in adolescence and high labour market
participation in early adulthood in a Danish context. Psychological resources
seemed to play a bigger role for females in early adolescence compared to males, 
for whom a larger impact was seen in late adolescence.

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-020-08531-w 
PMCID: PMC7092559
PMID: 32209059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Health Soc Care Community. 2020 Sep;28(5):1560-1568. doi: 10.1111/hsc.12980. Epub
2020 Mar 22.

Influential factors of well-being among Hungarian female hospice workers examined
through structural equation modelling.

Kegye A(1), Czeglédi E(1), Zana Á(1), Csikai EL(2), Hegedűs K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Behavioural Sciences, Semmelweis University,
Budapest, Hungary.
(2)School of Social Work, The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL, USA.

According to national hospice data in Hungary, approximately 1,600 healthcare
employees and volunteers work in hospice care (country population of 9.9
million). The aim of the study was to identify and examine influential
relationships among several variables that may affect well-being among female
hospice workers. Structural equation modeling analysis was conducted utilising
survey responses of 179 female hospice workers, including 79 nurses. Path
analysis revealed that work over-commitment (being employed in more than one job)
contributed to decreased psychological well-being through increased perceived
stress, sleep difficulties and vital exhaustion. A greater sense of coherence was
associated with lower levels of subjective stress, depressive symptoms and vital 
exhaustion and negatively correlated with over-commitment. Overall, even though
the physical and mental burden of the workers is increasing because of increased 
use of hospice, according to these results, most still engaged in hospice work.
Deeper analysis of the sense of coherence may point to development of effective
interventions that can help maintain well-being of hospice workers and reduce
attrition.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/hsc.12980 
PMID: 32200575  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Midwifery. 2020 Jul;86:102705. doi: 10.1016/j.midw.2020.102705. Epub 2020 Mar 12.

All that I need exists within me: A qualitative study of nulliparous Norwegian
women's experiences with planned home birth.

Skrondal TF(1), Bache-Gabrielsen T(2), Aune I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, ABC, Kirkeveien 166, 0450 Oslo, Norway.
Electronic address: tuva_falk@hotmail.com.
(2)Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, ABC, Kirkeveien 166, 0450 Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Mauritz Hansens gt 2,
7004 Trondheim, Norway.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to gain knowledge regarding how Norwegian
nulliparous women experience planned home birth and why they choose this route of
giving birth.
DESIGN: A qualitative approach was used, and the study data were derived from
semi-structured individual interviews, which were analysed through systematic
text condensation.
PARTICIPANTS: Ten Norwegian women aged nineteen to thirty-nine years were
interviewed. They had each gone through with a successful planned home birth of
their first child within the last two years. These women all resided in the
middle, western and eastern areas of Norway. A certified midwife was present
throughout the labour and birth, and no transfer to the hospital was necessary.
FINDINGS: The following two main themes were identified: 'inner motivation' and
'giving birth in safe surroundings'. The women in this study had a strong inner
faith in the normal physiological processes of labour and birth and had educated 
and prepared themselves carefully for their planned home birth. To be able to
enter one's own inner world was considered crucial for labour, and the trusting
relationship they had with their midwife made this possible.
KEY CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: Planned home birth may be
experienced as a very positive occurrence for nulliparous women, and the care
those women in this study received contained several elements that can help to
promote normal labour and birth at a time in which reducing interventions in
maternity care is of importance. Their positive birth experiences gave the women 
confidence both in their transition to motherhood as well as in other aspects of 
life.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.midw.2020.102705 
PMID: 32200282  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None declared.


414. Gac Sanit. 2020 Mar 18. pii: S0213-9111(20)30037-6. doi:
10.1016/j.gaceta.2019.12.002. [Epub ahead of print]

Salutogenic interventions and health effects: a scoping review of the literature.

Álvarez ÓS(1), Ruiz-Cantero MT(2), Cassetti V(3), Cofiño R(4), Álvarez-Dardet
C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Doctoral Programme in Health Science, University of Alicante, Alicante, Spain;
Public Health Directorate, Asturias Regional Ministry of Health, Oviedo, Spain.
Electronic address: Oscarsuarezalvarez@yahoo.es.
(2)Research Group in Public Health, University of Alicante, Alicante, Spain;
CIBER de Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Spain.
(3)School for Health and Related Research (ScHARR), University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(4)Public Health Directorate, Asturias Regional Ministry of Health, Oviedo,
Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the typology of implemented salutogenic interventions and
the health effects described by the authors.
METHOD: A scoping review of the literature published (PubMed, Embase, Web of
Science and Scopus) over the last ten years (2007-2016) was conducted. Articles
that included interventions with assessments of health outcomes were selected for
this review. The kappa index (86.4%) was calculated for the classification and
extraction of information.
RESULTS: 61 papers were selected out of the 676 works identified. These were
categorized into individual, grouped, mixed and intersectoral interventions. A
total of 85% of the interventions described positive effects. Adverse effects
were not reported. Methodological limitations were identified in 75% of the
papers. The interventions addressed a large variety of topics, especially in the 
field of mental health and chronic diseases. Collective actions described more
positive effects. Intersectoral actions were the only type of interventions to
have approached the impact of mortality reduction.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings support the existence of positive health effects of
salutogenic approaches. Important methodological limitations were identified,
such as biases in the selection of participants and sample sizes. Studies need to
be conducted with improved monitoring and evaluation designs. A more robust
theoretical framework and tools to evaluate the salutogenic contents are needed.

Copyright © 2020 SESPAS. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2019.12.002 
PMID: 32199676 


415. BMJ Open. 2020 Mar 19;10(3):e035025. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-035025.

Mindfulness-based programme for residents: study protocol of a randomised
controlled trial.

Aeschbach VM(1), Fendel JC(2), Göritz AS(2), Schmidt S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, Medical Center -
University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany
vanessa.aeschbach@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(2)Department of Occupational and Consumer Psychology, Institute of Psychology,
University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, Medical Center -
University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Residency is a stressful phase associated with high prevalence of
mental distress. Besides impaired personal health, mental distress in residents
has an impact on the quality of patient care and produces economic costs.
Therefore, there is demand for interventions that improve resident physicians'
mental health. The aim of the present study is to examine the effects of a
mindfulness-based intervention that has been tailored to residents' needs.
Specifically, mindfulness has been supplemented by a focus on the concept of
Muße.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: This study applies a randomised controlled multimethod
design. Residents assigned to the intervention group will participate in an
8-week mindfulness course followed by a 4-month maintenance phase, whereas
residents assigned to the control group will read text-based information about
mindfulness on a weekly basis for the duration of 8 weeks. The intervention is
focussed on a transfer of learnt techniques into the daily routine and is
targeted to promote residents' self-care as well as on building empathic
relationships. Participants will be assessed before, directly after the
intervention, after the maintenance phase as well as at follow-up 6 months after 
the intervention group completes the intervention. Assessments will consist of
self-report measures, physiological data, qualitative interviews, third-party
reports as well as implicit and projective measures and will focus on both
psychopathology and salutogenesis. The primary outcome will be burnout. Data will
be analysed using linear mixed modelling.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The study was approved by the ethics committee of the
Medical Center - University of Freiburg and is funded by the German Research
Foundation as part of the interdisciplinary Collaborative Research Center 'SFB
Muße 1015'. The results of this study will be published in scientific journals
and disseminated through the study's website, and conferences.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: DRKS00014015.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-035025 
PMCID: PMC7103807
PMID: 32198304  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


416. Int J Dent Hyg. 2020 Aug;18(3):307-313. doi: 10.1111/idh.12435. Epub 2020 Apr 7.

The association between Antonovsky's sense of coherence and job stress among
dental hygienists in Korea.

Lim HJ(1), Im AJ(2), Cho HA(3), Choi ES(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental Hygiene, Graduate School of Public Health Science, Eulji 
University, Seongnam, Korea.
(2)Department of Public Health, Graduate School, Dankook University, Cheonan,
Korea.
(3)Department of Dental Hygiene, Shinhan University, Uijeongbu, Korea.
(4)Gangwon Public Health Policy Institute, Chuncheon-si, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: High stress levels experienced by medical professionals are a
well-established phenomenon in current literature. However, there are few studies
focusing on stress experienced in the field of oral health or on the sense of
coherence (SOC) that helps to actively respond to job stress. The purpose of this
study was to analyse if there is an association between SOC and job stress among 
dental hygienists in Korea.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted on a convenience sample of 441
dental hygienists in the Seoul Gyeonggi province, Korea. The independent variable
was SOC which had three dimensions: comprehensibility, manageability and
meaningfulness. The dependent variable was job stress, which was evaluated using 
the Korean Occupational Stress Scale Short Form. Confounding factors were age,
marital status, educational background, type of hospital, and work experience.
The chi-square test and t test measures were used for bivariate analysis.
Multiple logistic regression analysis was performed to confirm the association
between SOC and job stress. The collected data were statistically analysed using 
SPSS version 22.0.
RESULTS: The SOC score showed a significant difference in relation to the job
stress score. The SOC score was high when the job stress was low (P < .001).
Overall SOC scores showed an inverse correlation with job stress.
CONCLUSION: This study reports that a higher SOC is associated with lower job
stress in Korean dental hygienists. Since a higher SOC in dental hygienists
indicated that they could cope with job stress more positively, it is important
to increase their SOC.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/idh.12435 
PMID: 32196912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2020 Mar 10;100(9):685-689. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0376-2491.2020.09.008.

[Clinical characteristics, treatment and prognosis of myelin oligodendrocyte
glycoprotein antibody-associated optic neuritis in children].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Hou C(1), Chen WX(1), Qiu W(2), Li XJ(1), Tian Y(1), Zhu HX(1), Zeng YR(1), Liang
HC(1), Peng BW(1), Chen LF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center,
Guangzhou 510120, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510630, China.

Objective: To investigate the clinical characteristics, treatment and prognosis
of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated optic neuritis
(MOG-ON) in pediatric patients. Methods: Clinical data, laboratory examination,
the initial best corrected visual acuity (BCVA), fundus,
neuroelectrophysiological results, MRI imaging, treatment and prognosis of
children diagnosed with MOG-ON from 2016 to 2019 were retrospectively analyzed.
Results: A total of 29 eyes from 16 children were involved, with a male/female
ratio of 1∶1, onset age of (7.0±2.9) years. Seven of 16 patients had prodromal
infection, with a unilateral/bilateral ratio of 3∶13, and 2 cases had recurrent
optic neuritis. Before treatment, BCVA of 19 eyes (65.5%) was ≤0.1, among them, 4
had no sense of light, 5 had light sense, 5 with sense of hands in front of eyes,
and 5 with sense of fingers in front of eyes. There were 10 eyes (34.5%) with
BCVA of 0.1-0.5. After treatment, there were 4 eyes (13.8%), 5 eyes (17.2%) and
20 eyes (69.0%) in groups with BCVA of 0.1-0.5, 0.5-1.0, and>1.0, respectively.
Twelve of 16 patients had optic papillitis in fundus examination during acute
phase. The latency was prolonged and the amplitude was decreased in P100 wave of 
all the children. Thirteen out of 16 children showed swelling and thickening of
optic nerve in MRI T2WI. MRI images exhibited intracranial demyelinating lesions 
in 12 of 16 children and long segment spinal cord lesions in 3 of 16 children.
Thirteen of 16 patients showed effective results after intravenous
methylprednisolone (IVMP) and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) treatment. There 
was no relapse after administration of mycophenolate mofetil in 2 recurrent
children. No progression after administration of rituximab was found in 1 child
with corticosteroid insensitivity. The average follow-up time was (16±9) months
and no recurrence occurred. Ten of 16 patients had full recovery, 4 had
significant improvement, and 2 showed no significant improvement. Conclusions:
There is no significant gender difference in the incidence of pediatric MOG-ON.
Bilateral involvement and severe visual impairment are common in acute phase.
Most patients have good response to IVMP combined with IVIG treatment and hence
have a good prognosis. Only a few of them have neurological sequelae.

Publisher: 目的： 回顾性分析未成年人髓鞘少突胶质细胞糖蛋白（MOG）抗体相关的视神经炎的临床特点、治疗及预后。 方法：
收集2016年1月1日至2018年12月31日在广州市妇女儿童医疗中心诊断为MOG抗体相关的视神经炎患者的临床资料、实验室检查、最佳矫正视力、眼底检查、神经电生理
及影像学结果、治疗及预后资料，进行回顾性分析。 结果：
（1）临床特点：16例患者共29眼受累，男∶女为1∶1，起病年龄为（7.0±2.9）岁，7/16患者存在前驱感染，单侧∶双侧为3∶13，复发性视神经炎2例。治疗前
视力≤0.1共19眼（65.5%），其中无光感4眼，光感5眼，眼前手动5眼，眼前指动5眼；0.1~0.5共10眼（34.5%）。治疗后随访视力：0.1~0.5共4
眼（13.8%），0.5~1.0共5眼（17.2%），>1.0共20眼（69.0%）。（2）辅助检查：12/16患者急性期眼底检查可见视神经乳头炎，所有患者视觉诱
发电位检查均有不同程度P100波潜伏期延长及振幅降低，13/16患者MRI
T(2)WI可见视神经肿胀、增粗。12/16患者MRI可见颅内病变，3/16患者有长节段脊髓病变。（3）治疗及预后：13/16急性期给予静脉甲泼尼龙冲击联合静脉输
注人免疫球蛋白治疗有效，2例复发视神经炎的患者维持期给予霉酚酸脂口服无复发，1例激素不敏感患者给予利妥昔单抗治疗病情无进展。患者随访时间（16±9）个月，随访期间
无复发，10/16治愈，4/16明显好转，2/16无明显改善。 结论：
未成年人MOG抗体相关的视神经炎患者发病率无明显的性别差异，双侧受累多见，急性期视力受损严重。多数患者急性期静脉甲泼尼龙冲击联合人免疫球蛋白治疗反应好。多数患者预
后好，少数患者有神经系统后遗症。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0376-2491.2020.09.008 
PMID: 32187912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Behav Brain Res. 2020 May 27;386:112598. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2020.112598. Epub
2020 Mar 14.

Addiction is socially engineered exploitation of natural biological
vulnerability.

Ross D(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Society, Politics, and Ethics, University College Cork, 4 Elderwood,
College Road, Cork, T12 AW89, Ireland; School of Economics, University of Cape
Town, Private bag, Rondebosch, 7701, South Africa; Center for Economic Analysis
of Risk, Georgia State University, Robinson College of Business, 35 Broad Street,
11th Floor, Atlanta, GA 30303 USA.

Interdisciplinary study of addiction is facilitated by relative unification of
the concept. What should be sought is not formal unification through literal
analytic definition, which would undermine practical flexibility within
disciplines and intervention practices. However, leading controversies around
whether addiction should be conceived as a 'disease', and over whether addiction 
is 'chosen' behavior, are made more difficult to resolve by failure to apply
philosophical reflection on these general concepts. Such reflection should be
sensitive to two kinds of constraint: coherence in description of empirical,
including neuroscientific, observation, and utility in framing normative goals in
treatment and policy design. Following review of various interpretations of
addiction, disease, and choice across contributing disciplines, it is concluded
that addiction is most plausibly viewed as a disease at the scale of public
health research and policy, but not personal (e.g. clinical) management and
intervention. Addicts must make choices to recover, and in that respect addiction
is a 'disorder of choice'. However, it is concluded that the most relevant sense 
of 'disorder' arises at the social rather than the personal scale.

Copyright © 2020 The Author. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2020.112598 
PMID: 32184156 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.


419. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Mar 13;17(6). pii: E1861. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17061861.

Sense of Coherence in Nurses: A Systematic Review.

Masanotti GM(1), Paolucci S(2), Abbafati E(2), Serratore C(2), Caricato M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Director of Experimental Centre of Research for Health Promotion and Health
Education (CeSPES), 06129 Perugia, Italy.
(2)School of Specialization in Hygiene and Preventive Medicine, University of
Perugia, 06129 Perugia, Italy.

Background: Nurses experience high levels of distress due to the nature of their 
work and workplaces; Antonovsky's salutogenic theory shows that individual and
work-related factors can influence human health. The aim of this paper is to
analyze the possible correlations with different work-related and individual
variables, which influence or are influenced by Sense of Coherence (SOC) and
verify the possible use of SOC scales to prevent negative health determinants in 
workplaces. Methods: Electronic databases were searched with selected studies
compared for sample, sample size, study design and basic results. Cross-sectional
studies were reviewed for correlations between individual physical and mental
health, distress, burnout, job satisfaction and SOC, with intervention studies
used to assess the possible impact of training on nurses' SOC. Results: The
review found several correlations between SOC and different work-related
variables; but also with several individual characteristics. Conclusion: The
review found that SOC was predictor of depressive state, burnout, job
dissatisfaction among female nurses; therefore, SOC could be a health promoting
resource.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17061861 
PMCID: PMC7142757
PMID: 32183042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declare conflicts of interest or state “The
authors declare no conflict of interest”.


420. Qual Health Res. 2020 Jun;30(7):1004-1018. doi: 10.1177/1049732320907585. Epub
2020 Mar 14.

Health as Experience: Exploring Health in Daily Life Drawing From the Work of
Aaron Antonovsky and John Dewey.

Maivorsdotter N(1), Andersson J(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Skövde, Skövde, Sweden.
(2)Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden.

Research has pursued salutogenic and narrative approaches to deal with questions 
about how everyday settings are constitutive for different health practices.
Healthy behavior is not a distinguishable action, but a chain of activities,
often embedded in other social practices. In this article, we have endeavored to 
describe such a chain of activities guided by the salutogenic claim of exploring 
the good living argued by McCuaig and Quennerstedt. We use biographical material 
written by Karl Ove Knausgaard who has created a life story entitled My Struggle.
The novel is selected upon an approach influenced by Brinkmann who stresses that 
literature can be seen as a qualitative social inquiry in which the novelist is
an expert in transforming personal life experiences into common human expressions
of life. The study illustrates how research with a broader notion of health can
convey experiences of health, thereby complementing (and sometimes challenging)
public health evidence.

DOI: 10.1177/1049732320907585 
PMCID: PMC7322927
PMID: 32174216 


421. Palliat Support Care. 2020 Dec;18(6):691-698. doi: 10.1017/S1478951520000176.

"I want to go home": How location at death influences caregiver well-being in
bereavement.

Waldrop DP(1), McGinley JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)University at Buffalo School of Social Work, 685 Baldy Hall, Buffalo, NY.
(2)Department of Social Work, Binghamton University, PO Box 6000, Binghamton, NY.

OBJECTIVES: Goal concordant or congruent care involves having expressed wishes
upheld. Yet, the preferred location for end-of-life care may be unaddressed.
Caregiver-patient congruence between preferred and actual locations of care may
influence the quality of life in bereavement. The study aimed to explore how the 
congruence between caregiver-patient preferred and actual locations of death
influenced well-being in bereavement.
METHODS: Mixed methods were employed. In-depth in-person interviews were
conducted with 108 bereaved caregivers of a hospice patient about 4 months after 
the death. An interview guide was used to collect quantitative and qualitative
data: demographics, decision-making, Core Bereavement Items (CBI), Health Related
Quality of Life, and perspectives on the end-of-life experiences. Data were
analyzed with a convergent mixed methods one-phase process.
RESULTS: Patient preference-actual location congruence occurred for 53%;
caregiver preference-actual location congruence occurred for 74%;
caregiver-patient preference and location of death occurred for 48%. Participants
who reported some type of incongruence demonstrated higher levels of distress,
including more days of being physically and emotionally unwell and more intense
bereavement symptoms. The Acute Separation subscale and CBI total scores
demonstrated significant differences for participants who experienced
incongruence compared with those who did not. Preference location congruence
themes emerged: (1) caregiver-patient location congruence, (2) caregiver-patient 
location incongruence, and (3) location informed bereavement.
CONCLUSIONS: Congruence between a dying person's preferred and actual locations
at death has been considered good care. There has been little focus on the
reciprocity between caregiver-patient wishes. Discussing preferences about the
place of end-stage care may not make location congruence possible, but it can
foster shared understanding and support for caregivers' sense of coherence and
well-being in bereavement.

DOI: 10.1017/S1478951520000176 
PMID: 32172719 


422. Brain Behav. 2020 Apr;10(4):e01590. doi: 10.1002/brb3.1590. Epub 2020 Mar 11.

A twelve-week, four-arm, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2
prospective clinical trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of an
anthroposophic multimodal treatment on chronic pain in outpatients with postpolio
syndrome.

Ghelman R(1)(2), Akiyama IY(1), de Souza VT(1), Falcão J(1), Orgolini V(1),
Hosomi JK(3), Quadros AAJ(1), Oliveira ASB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Department of Obstetrics, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, São Paulo,
Brazil.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic pain and fatigue are the main symptoms of postpoliomyelitis
syndrome (PPS). This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of an
anthroposophic multimodal treatment for chronic pain in PPS outpatients.
METHODS: A twelve-week, four-arm, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
phase 2 prospective clinical trial was designed to compare four groups (n = 48): 
groups A and B received daily active experimental transdermal gel (ETG) or
placebo gel (PTG), respectively; groups C and D received weekly external
therapies, art therapies, and neurofunctional reorganization, plus either daily
ETG or PTG, respectively. The pain symptoms were evaluated through a visual
analogue scale (VAS), the McGill questionnaire, and thermography. Quality of life
and resilience were evaluated by the WHOQOL-BREF and Antonovsky sense of
coherence questionnaires applied at baseline and after the interventions.
RESULTS: No related adverse events occurred, and 10% of the patients reports
dysphagia improvement. In the groups C and D, pain reduction was statistically
significant in both the placebo group (p = .02, d = 1.315) and in the ETG
(p = .005, d = 2.035). However, following the week-to-week evolution of pain with
the concomitant use of the ETG, this significant pain reduction occurred earlier 
from the 4th week and continued to decrease (p = .016, d = 1.369). In the group
that received the complete multimodal treatment, the greatest significant benefit
in increasing quality of life occurred in the physical domain and elevation in
resilience with an emphasis on meaning and comprehension domains.
CONCLUSIONS: The anthroposophic multimodal treatment group presented both safety 
and efficacy as an analgesic in the groups that received the nonpharmacological
therapies, much earlier when associated with the ETG. The multimodal approach
corresponded to the pattern of better efficacy for both pain reduction and
improvement in quality of life and resilience.

© 2020 The Authors. Brain and Behavior published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.1590 
PMCID: PMC7177555
PMID: 32162497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Hand Ther. 2020 Oct - Dec;33(4):455-469. doi: 10.1016/j.jht.2019.12.009. Epub
2020 Mar 7.

An occupation-based intervention in patients with hand-related disorders grouped 
using the sense of coherence scale-A randomized controlled trial.

Hansen AØ(1), Kristensen HK(2), Cederlund R(3), Möller S(4), Tromborg H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense C,
Denmark; Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Odense University Hospital, Odense C,
Denmark; Department of Rehabilitation, Odense University Hospital, Odense C,
Denmark. Electronic address: alice.oerts@rsyd.dk.
(2)Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense C,
Denmark; Department of Rehabilitation, Odense University Hospital, Odense C,
Denmark; Health Sciences Research Center, University College Lillebaelt, Odense
M, Denmark.
(3)Health Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense C,
Denmark; OPEN - Odense Patient data Explorative Network, Odense University
Hospital, Odense C, Denmark.
(5)Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense C,
Denmark; Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Odense University Hospital, Odense C,
Denmark.

STUDY DESIGN: A nonblinded randomized controlled trial.
INTRODUCTION: Occupation-based interventions are superior to physical
exercise-based interventions in patients with activity limitations. However, only
a few studies have examined the effect in patients with hand-related disorders.
Patients recover heterogeneously, which could be due to personal factors, such as
sense of coherence (SOC).
PURPOSE OF THE STUDY: To investigate the effectiveness of an occupation-based
intervention for patients with hand-related disorders and whether SOC can give an
indication of the expected effects.
METHODS: A total of 504 patients were stratified into three SOC groups and then
randomized to either an occupation-based intervention, including physical
exercises (OBI) or a physical exercise-based occupation-focused intervention. The
primary outcome, functioning, was measured using the Disability of the Arm,
Shoulder and Hand questionnaire. Primary endpoint was at three months. Patients
were followed up for a year.
RESULTS: No significant difference was found in primary outcome analysis.
Nevertheless, patients receiving OBI had a statistically significant and greater 
change in satisfaction with their occupational performance at one, two, and three
months follow-up. Patients with a weak SOC had worse functioning and lower
health-related quality of life than those in the other groups, at all times.
CONCLUSIONS: OBI as delivered in this study was not superior to physical
exercise-based occupation-focused intervention in this patient group. However, in
taking a client-centered approach, we recommend that OBI be based on individual
needs, given that patients had a statistically greater change in score regarding 
satisfaction with their occupational performance. It is evident that patients
with a weaker SOC have a lower level of functioning. This knowledge should inform
clinical practice.

Copyright © 2020 Hanley & Belfus. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jht.2019.12.009 
PMID: 32156580 


424. Support Care Cancer. 2020 Nov;28(11):5371-5379. doi: 10.1007/s00520-020-05378-0. 
Epub 2020 Mar 5.

Sense of coherence and its relationship to participation, cancer-related fatigue,
symptom burden, and quality of life in women with breast cancer participating in 
the OptiTrain exercise trial.

Hiensch AE(1), Bolam KA(2), Mijwel S(2), May AM(3), Wengström Y(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
a.e.hiensch-2@umcutrecht.nl.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Theme Cancer, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

PURPOSE: This study examined the Sense of Coherence (SOC) of patients
participating in the randomized controlled 'Optimal Training for Women with
Breast Cancer' (OptiTrain) study and assessed how patient characteristics were
associated with SOC. Secondary aims were to assess the association between SOC
and patients' participation in this study and to determine whether SOC moderates 
the effect of the 16-week exercise intervention on fatigue, quality of life
(QoL), and symptom burden in women with breast cancer undergoing chemotherapy.
METHODS: Modified Poisson regression analyses were conducted to determine the
relative risk of weak-normal SOC versus strong SOC in terms of exercise session
attendance, study and intervention dropout, and long absence rates. Analyses of
covariance were performed to assess whether SOC moderated the effect of the
exercise intervention (pinteraction ≤ 0.10).
RESULTS: Two hundred and forty women with early breast cancer (mean age 53 ± 10) 
participated in the OptiTrain study. Women with strong SOC reported less fatigue,
lower symptom burden, and higher QoL. Women with weak-normal SOC were
significantly more likely to drop out from the OptiTrain study and tended to have
slightly poorer exercise session attendance. Women with breast cancer and weaker 
SOC benefitted as much from the exercise intervention, in terms of fatigue and
QoL, as those with stronger SOC (pinteraction > 0.10).
CONCLUSIONS: Strong SOC appears to be associated with a more positive subjective 
state of health. Women with weak-normal SOC may need additional support to
encourage participation and adherence in exercise trials. Assessing SOC may
assist clinicians to identify and provide extra support for participants with
weak SOC, who may be less inclined to participate in exercise programs.

DOI: 10.1007/s00520-020-05378-0 
PMCID: PMC7546973
PMID: 32140973  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Mar 3;17(5). pii: E1619. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17051619.

Does the Association between Guardians' Sense of Coherence and their Children's
Untreated Caries Differ According to Socioeconomic Status?

Mizuta A(1), Aida J(2), Nakamura M(3), Ojima T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Health Nursing, Hamamatsu University School of
Medicine, 1-20-1, Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka 431-3192, Japan.
(2)Department of International and Community Oral Health, Tohoku University
Graduate School of Dentistry, 4-1 Seiryouchiyou, Aobaku, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575,
Japan.
(3)Department of Community Health and Preventive Medicine, Hamamatsu University
School of Medicine, 1-20-1, Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka 431-3192, 
Japan.

Untreated caries is the most prevalent disease in the world. A sense of coherence
(SOC) is believed to contribute to oral health. We aimed to clarify the
association between guardians' SOC and their children's caries based on
socioeconomic status (SES) in Japan. This study's subjects were Japanese public
junior high schoolers (N = 1730), aged 12-15, and their guardians in Kosai City. 
We administered a questionnaire survey among guardians in 2016 to assess their
SOC and family environment. With their students' consent, public junior high
schools shared the results of the dental examinations that were part of their
school physicals. Multivariate logistic regression was conducted to clarify the
association between guardians' SOC and their children's untreated decayed
permanent teeth. We also conducted a stratified analysis according to a relative 
poverty line. We observed in the multivariate regression a significant inverse
association between children's untreated decay and their guardians' SOC (OR 0.93,
95%CI 0.87-1.00). The association of SOC was stronger in the low economic group
(OR 0.64, 95%CI 0.43-0.95). Guardians with higher SOC were associated with
children having fewer caries. Guardians' SOC is a factor for the prevalence of
caries and access to dental care, especially among children with low economic
status.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17051619 
PMCID: PMC7084832
PMID: 32138204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


426. J Psychosom Res. 2020 May;132:109977. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2020.109977. Epub
2020 Feb 24.

Predictors of asylum seekers' mental health course in the early stages of
resettlement: Results of a longitudinal study.

Kindermann D(1), Zeyher V(2), Nagy E(3), Brandenburg-Ceynowa H(4), Junne F(5),
Friederich HC(6), Bozorgmehr K(7), Nikendei C(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Internal Medicine and Psychosomatics, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
David.Kindermann@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(2)Department of General Internal Medicine and Psychosomatics, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
valentina_zeyher@web.de.
(3)Department of General Internal Medicine and Psychosomatics, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
Ede.Nagy@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(4)Department of General Internal Medicine and Psychosomatics, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
hannah.br@ndenburg.com.
(5)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University Hospital
Tübingen, University of Tübingen, Germany. Electronic address:
Florian.Junne@med.uni-tuebingen.de.
(6)Department of General Internal Medicine and Psychosomatics, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
Hans-Christoph.Friederich@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(7)Department of General Practice and Health Services Research, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany; Department of Population Medicine and
Health Services Research, School of Public Health Bielefeld University,
Bielefeld, Germany. Electronic address: Kayvan.Bozorgmehr@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(8)Department of General Internal Medicine and Psychosomatics, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
Christoph.Nikendei@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

OBJECTIVE: Asylum seekers who have experienced persecution, war and torture show 
high prevalence rates of stress-related mental disorders. After arrival in the
host country, the early stages of resettlement seem to be a particularly
vulnerable phase characterized by social instability. This longitudinal study
aimed to explore predictors of the asylum seekers' course of mental health during
the transition phase from a state registration and reception center to municipal 
shelters.
METHODS: We used hierarchical regression analysis to assess the symptom course of
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, anxiety and panic disorders as 
well as well-being in n = 84 asylum seekers. The follow-up assessment took place 
three to five months after baseline assessment. The following blocks of possible 
predictors were included in the statistical models: (1) sociodemographic
variables, (2) cultural background related variables, (3) psychometric measures
of emotion regulation and sense of coherence and (4) time range to follow-up.
RESULTS: Language proficiency, origin, religion and gender were stronger
predictors of the asylum seekers' mental health course in the early stages of
resettlement than emotion regulation and sense of coherence.
CONCLUSIONS: Sociodemographic and cultural background related variables, like
language proficiency have a high psychosocial relevance for asylum seekers in the
early phase of the asylum process. Therefore, language courses should be
implemented progressively. Psychotherapy for asylum seekers should always be
performed with awareness for cultural specific perspectives and acculturative
adjustment processes.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2020.109977 
PMID: 32126340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
have no competing interest to report.


427. Curr Sleep Med Rep. 2020 Mar;6(1):1-10. doi: 10.1007/s40675-020-00164-0. Epub
2020 Feb 1.

"It's Been a Hard Day's Night": Sleep Problems in Caregivers for Older Adults.

Leggett AN(1), Morley M(2), Smagula SF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, 4250 Plymouth Rd. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA, 734-232-0538.
(2)School of Public Health, 1415 Washington Heights, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA 48109, 734-764-5425.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh 3811
O'Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 15213 412-246-6674.

Purpose of review: This paper critically evaluates literature from the last three
years on sleep in caregivers for older adults. Research is evaluated in four main
areas: factors related to caregivers having sleep problems, sleep health in
various types of caregivers, how caregivers' sleep and health inter-relate, and
interventions to improve sleep.
Recent findings: A range of both care recipients' and caregivers' characteristics
have been associated with caregiver sleep quality measured subjectively and
objectively. Care recipient factors associated with caregiver sleep quality
include fall risk and sleep quality, while caregiver factors include stress,
duration, intensity, provision of medical/nursing care tasks, and even particular
serotonin genotypes (e.g. short allele carriers for 5-HTTLPR). While the greatest
focus has been on dementia caregivers, recent work suggests groups such as
end-of-life caregivers, former caregivers, and caregivers with multiple care
roles (e.g. child, older adult, paid care) have sleep disturbances that vary by
their unique contexts. Caregiver's sleep, particularly subjective assessments,
relates to their mood and physiological well-being; and evidence suggests that
sleep may be an important mediator linking care stressors with mental health.
Factors such as mindfulness and sense of coherence may protect caregivers from
sleep disturbances.

DOI: 10.1007/s40675-020-00164-0 
PMCID: PMC8168632
PMID: 34079689 


428. J Family Med Prim Care. 2020 Jan 28;9(1):16-19. doi: 10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_260_19. 
eCollection 2020 Jan.

Salutogenesis: A bona fide guide towards health preservation.

Bhattacharya S(1), Pradhan KB(2), Bashar MA(3), Tripathi S(4), Thiyagarajan A(5),
Srivastava A(1), Singh A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Medicine, Himalayan Institute of Medical Sciences,
Dehradun, India.
(2)Department of Healthcare Management, Faculty Healthcare Management, Chitkara
University, Rajpura, Punjab, India.
(3)Department of Community Medicine, MM Institute of Medical Sciences and
Research, MMDU, Mullana, Haryana, India.
(4)Directorate of Health Services, Health Administrator, Uttar Pradesh
Government, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(5)School of Public Health, Public Health Specialist, SRM University, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu, India.
(6)Department of Community Medicine, PGIMER, Chandigarh, India.

Preserving health requires a holistic approach involving the component of
physical, mental, social, and spiritual well-being as stated by World Health
Organisation. Salutogenesis concept focuses on the factors responsible for
well-being rather than the disease pathogenesis in contrary to pathogenesis
concept. This evidence-based summary tries to shed a light on existing concept
called salutogenesis which is much required in the current scenario.

Copyright: © 2020 Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care.

DOI: 10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_260_19 
PMCID: PMC7014834
PMID: 32110558 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


429. Pril (Makedon Akad Nauk Umet Odd Med Nauki). 2019 Dec 1;40(3):57-68. doi:
10.2478/prilozi-2020-0005.

Analysis of EEG Characteristics and Coherence in Patients Diagnosed as Borderline
Personality.

Pop-Jordanova N(1), Markovska-Simoska S(1), Milovanovic M(2), Lecic-Tosevski
D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, North Macedonia.
(2)Institute for mental health, Belgrade, Serbia.

Borderline personality disorder is a clinically important psychiatric diagnosis
that is distinct from major depressive, bipolar and posttraumatic stress
disorders, despite the overlapping symptoms. The diagnosis is mainly clinical and
must follow the DMS 5 (or ICD 10) characteristics. The most common age at first
presentation is in late adolescence, but the disorder frequently can be stay as
misdiagnosed. Our study is concerned to QEEG characteristics, as well as
coherence in borderline patients compared with healthy group, matched by number, 
gender and age and selected randomly. Our obtained results showed that
electrophysiological characteristics for borderlines are fairly without
statistical differences, except in low bands (delta and theta), which showed
significantly lower frequencies and coherence compared to a healthy group. Future
research in this filed with more patients is highly recommended.

DOI: 10.2478/prilozi-2020-0005 
PMID: 32109211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Feb 25;17(5). pii: E1463. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17051463.

A Salutogenic Approach to Disaster Recovery: The Case of the Lac-Mégantic Rail
Disaster.

Généreux M(1)(2), Roy M(1)(3), O'Sullivan T(4), Maltais D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke,
QC J1H5N4, Canada.
(2)Eastern Townships Public Health Department, Sherbrooke, QC J1H1R3, Canada.
(3)Health Technology and Social Services Assessment Unit, Eastern Townships
Integrated University Health and Social Services Centre, Sherbrooke, QC J1H 4C4, 
Canada.
(4)Interdisciplinary School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, K1N 6N5, Canada.
(5)Department of Human and Social Sciences, Université du Québec à Chicoutimi,
Saguenay, QC, G7H2B1, Canada.

In July 2013, a train carrying crude oil derailed in Lac-Mégantic (Canada). This 
disaster provoked a major fire, 47 deaths, the destruction of 44 buildings, a
massive evacuation, and an unparalleled oil spill. Since 2013, Public Health has 
undertaken several actions to address this challenging situation, using both
quantitative and qualitative methods. Community-based surveys were conducted in
Lac-Mégantic in 2014, 2015 and 2018. The first two surveys showed persistent and 
widespread health needs. Inspired by a salutogenic approach, Public Health has
shifted its focus from health protection to health promotion. In 2016, a Day of
Reflection was organized during which a map of community assets and an action
plan for the community recovery were co-constructed with local stakeholders. The 
creation of an Outreach Team is an important outcome of this collective
reflection. This team aims to enhance resilience and adaptive capacity. Several
promising initiatives arose from the action plan-all of which greatly contributed
to mobilize the community. Interestingly, the 2018 survey suggests that the
situation is now evolving positively. This case study stresses the importance of 
recognizing community members as assets, rather than victims, and seeking a
better balance between health protection and health promotion approaches.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17051463 
PMCID: PMC7084865
PMID: 32106475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


431. Health Promot Int. 2020 Dec 1;35(6):1406-1414. doi: 10.1093/heapro/daaa013.

Effects on general health associated with beach proximity in Barcelona (Spain).

Ballesteros-Olza M(1), Gracia-de-Rentería P(1), Pérez-Zabaleta A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aquae Chair in Water Economics, National Distance Education University (UNED),
Paseo Senda del Rey, 11, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

Health benefits of blue spaces have been less studied compared with other urban
natural environments. As a type of blue space, beaches are also affected by this 
lack of evidence, despite their cultural and economic importance in lots of
coastal regions all over the world. Based on secondary health data from 3192
participants of the Health Survey of Barcelona 2016, we conducted a logit
regression analysis to explore the relationship between people's general health
and beach proximity from their dwelling place, controlling for several health
determinants. Our main results suggested that having good general health was less
likely for a 1-km increase in the linear distance to the closest beach from
people's dwelling places (OR: 0.93; 95% CI: 0.87, 1.00). Moreover, the
probability of having good general health was 45% higher for people living in the
first 2 km from the beach (OR: 1.45; 95% CI: 1.01, 2.09), relative to those
living >5-10 km from it. Also, these health effects were stronger for people with
a low family income. These findings contribute to grow the currently small body
of research related to health benefits of beach spaces. Likewise, they encourage 
fostering the use of these spaces for health promotion in cities, as well as
protecting them and improving their accessibility and safety. Further research
should lean towards the underlying causes of these health benefits linked to
people's exposure to beach spaces.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/daaa013 
PMID: 32105314 


432. Sleep Breath. 2020 Dec;24(4):1599-1605. doi: 10.1007/s11325-020-02039-8. Epub
2020 Feb 26.

Subjective sleep quality is associated with disease status in COPD patients. The 
cross-sectional Greek UNLOCK study.

Ierodiakonou D(1)(2), Bouloukaki I(3)(4), Kampouraki M(5), Papadokostakis P(6),
Poulorinakis I(7), Lampraki I(2), Athanasiou P(2), Schiza S(8), Tsiligianni I(9);
Greek UNLOCK Group.

Collaborators: Kampouraki M, Ierodiakonou D, Tsiligianni I, Lintovoi E,
Karanassos D, Papadokostakis P, Poulorinakis I, Maltezis K, Chorti M, Petrovitsos
E, Hamind S, Gialamas I, Athanasiou P, Bempi V, Lampraki I.

Author information: 
(1)Health Planning Unit, Department of Social Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Crete, Voutes Campus, GR-71003, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(2)Department of Public Health, Heraklion University Hospital, Heraklion, Crete, 
Greece.
(3)Health Planning Unit, Department of Social Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Crete, Voutes Campus, GR-71003, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
izolthi@gmail.com.
(4)Sleep Disorders Center, Department of Respiratory Medicine, School of
Medicine, University of Crete, Voutes Campus, GR-71003, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
izolthi@gmail.com.
(5)Primary care practice, Health Center of Moires, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(6)Garipa primary care practice, Health Center of Arcalohori, Heraklion, Crete,
Greece.
(7)Primary care practice, Health Center of Agia Varvara, Heraklion, Crete,
Greece.
(8)Sleep Disorders Center, Department of Respiratory Medicine, School of
Medicine, University of Crete, Voutes Campus, GR-71003, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(9)Health Planning Unit, Department of Social Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Crete, Voutes Campus, GR-71003, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
i.tsiligianni@uoc.gr.

PURPOSE: The association of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) severity
and related health status with sleep quality remains unclear. We aimed to
investigate the association between COPD and sleep quality in the Greek national 
branch of the UNLOCK cohort.
METHODS: A sample of 257 COPD patients enrolled cross-sectionally from primary
care in Greece. Sleep quality was assessed by the COPD and Asthma Sleep Impact
Scale (CASIS-7 items) questionnaire (higher score indicates worse sleep quality).
We tested for associations of sleep impairment with health status (CAT and mMRC
scores), exacerbations, hospitalizations, GOLD 2018 ABCD status, inhaler
adherence, frailty, and sense of coherence, adjusting for age, gender, smoking
status, and comorbidities.
RESULTS: The majority of patients reported uncontrolled symptoms (91% with ≥ 10
CAT or 61% with ≥ 2 mMRC). Mean (SD) age was 65 (12.3) with 79% males. CASIS-7
mean (SD) score was 37.7 (12.9). After adjustments, CASIS was significantly
associated with worse health status (e.g., CASIS increased with CAT ≥ 10
[β = 12.53, (95% CI, 6.82, 18.25); p < 0.001], mMRC ≥ 2 [β = 4.96, (95% CI, 1.56,
8.34); p = 0.004]), COPD severity (CAT-based GOLD BD [β = 8.88 (95% CI, 2.50,
15.26); p = 0.007]), frailty [β = 8.85 (95% CI 4.45,13.25); p < 0.001], and sense
of coherence [β = -0.14 (95% CI -0.21, -0.06), p < 001]. When using a CASIS
cut-off score of 30 as indicator of sleep impairment, additional to the
aforementioned associations, we found increased risk for sleep impairment with
≥ 2 exacerbations/year and poor inhaler adherence (p value < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that worse health status and COPD severity are
associated with poor sleep quality in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s11325-020-02039-8 
PMID: 32103395 


433. Br J Sports Med. 2021 Feb;55(4):198-205. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2019-101386. Epub 
2020 Feb 26.

Suicidal thoughts (ideation) among elite athletics (track and field) athletes:
associations with sports participation, psychological resourcefulness and having 
been a victim of sexual and/or physical abuse.

Timpka T(1)(2)(3), Spreco A(4)(2)(3), Dahlstrom O(4)(5), Jacobsson J(4)(2),
Kowalski J(4)(2), Bargoria V(4)(2)(6), Mountjoy M(7), Svedin CG(4)(2)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Athletics Research Center, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden
toomas.timpka@liu.se.
(2)Department of Health, Medicine, and Caring Sciences, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden.
(3)Unit for Health Analysis, Centre for Healthcare Development, Region
Östergötland, Linköping, Sweden.
(4)Athletics Research Center, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(5)Department of Behavioural Sciences and Learning, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden.
(6)Department Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, Moi University, Eldoret, Kenya.
(7)Department of Family Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Ersta Sköndal Bräcke University College, Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: To examine associations between suicidal ideation and sexual and
physical abuse among active and recently retired elite athletics (track and
field) athletes.
METHODS: The study population consisted of all athletes (n=402) selected for a
Swedish Athletics team between 2011 and 2017. Data on suicidal ideation, suicidal
events (estimated through the 1 year non-sports injury prevalence), lifetime
abuse experiences, sociodemographics, sense of coherence and coping strategies
were collected using a cross-sectional survey. The data were analysed using
binary logistic regression with suicidal ideation and non-sports injury as
outcomes.
RESULTS: 192 athletes (47.8%) returned data. The prevalence of suicidal ideation 
was 15.6% (men 17.4%; women 14.2%) and the non-sports injury prevalence was 8.0% 
(men 11.6%; women 5.7%). Among women, suicidal ideation was associated with
having been sexually abused (OR 5.94, 95% CI 1.42 to 24.90; p=0.015) and lower
sense of coherence (OR 0.90, 95% CI 0.85 to 0.96; p=0.001) (Nagelkerke R2=0.33). 
Among men, suicidal ideation was only associated with use of behavioural
disengagement for coping (OR 1.51, 95% CI 1.18 to 1.95; p=0.001) (R2 =0.25).
Among women, non-sports injury prevalence was associated with having been
sexually abused (OR 8.61, 95% CI 1.34 to 55.1; p=0.023) and participating in an
endurance event (OR 7.37, 95% CI 1.11 to 48.9; p=0.039 (R2 =0.23), while among
men, having immigrant parents (OR 5.67, 95% CI 1.31 to 24.5; p=0.020) (R2 =0.11) 
was associated with injury outside sports.
CONCLUSIONS: About one out of six international athletics athletes reported
having experienced suicidal ideation. World Athletics and National Olympic
Committees need to include suicide prevention in their athlete protection
programmes.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bjsports-2019-101386 
PMCID: PMC7873412
PMID: 32102912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


434. Eye Brain. 2020 Jan 31;12:33-44. doi: 10.2147/EB.S226319. eCollection 2020.

Ganglion Cell Complex Analysis in Glaucoma Patients: What Can It Tell Us?

Scuderi G(1), Fragiotta S(1), Scuderi L(2), Iodice CM(3), Perdicchi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)NESMOS Department, Ophthalmology Unit, S. Andrea Hospital, University of Rome 
"La Sapienza", Rome, Italy.
(2)Ophthalmology Unit, Department of Sense Organs, Azienda Policlinico Umberto I,
University of Rome "La Sapienza", Rome, Italy.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Rome "La Sapienza", Rome,
Italy.

Glaucoma is a group of optic neuropathies characterized by a progressive
degeneration of retina ganglion cells (RGCs) and their axons that precedes
functional changes detected on the visual field. The macular ganglion cell
complex (GCC), available in commercial Fourier-domain optical coherence
tomography, allows the quantification of the innermost retinal layers that are
potentially involved in the glaucomatous damage, including the retinal nerve
fiber (RNFL), ganglion cell and inner plexiform layers. The average GCC thickness
and its related parameters represent a reliable biomarker in detecting
preperimetric glaucomatous damage. The most accurate GCC parameters are
represented by average and inferior GCC thicknesses, and they can be associated
with progressive visual field loss. Although the diagnostic accuracy increases
with more severe glaucomatous damage and higher signal strength values, it is not
affected by increasing axial length, resulting in a more accurate discrimination 
of glaucomatous damage in myopic eyes with respect to the traditional RNFL
thickness. The analysis of the structure-function relationship revealed a good
agreement between the loss in retinal sensitivity and GCC thickness. The use of a
10-2° visual field grid, adjusted for the anatomical RGCs displacement, describes
more accurately the relationship between RGCs thickness and visual field
sensitivity loss.

© 2020 Scuderi et al.

DOI: 10.2147/EB.S226319 
PMCID: PMC6999543
PMID: 32099501 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.


435. Front Psychol. 2020 Jan 31;11:84. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00084. eCollection
2020.

The Key Job Demands and Resources of Nursing Staff: An Integrative Review of
Reviews.

Broetje S(1), Jenny GJ(1), Bauer GF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Public & Organizational Health, Center of Salutogenesis, Epidemiology,
Biostatistics and Prevention Institute, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.

The aim of our review is to identify the key job resources and demands of nursing
staff by integrating findings from previously published reviews along the lines
of the JD-R model. Understanding these is highly relevant given the
ever-increasing pressure in nursing work and the challenges of healthcare
organizations in recruiting qualified staff. It is also an important step toward 
developing targeted workplace interventions. A comprehensive search of the
literature identified 14 quantitative and qualitative reviews that were included 
in our integrative review of reviews. Thematic analysis identified three key job 
demands and six key job resources of nursing staff, namely work overload, lack of
formal rewards, work-life interference, supervisor support, fair and authentic
management, transformational leadership, interpersonal relations, autonomy and
professional resources. Our results corroborate findings from previous reviews,
expand the relevance and generalizability by considering a broader range of
relevant health-related and motivational outcomes, and highlight the importance
of leadership practices in nursing.

Copyright © 2020 Broetje, Jenny and Bauer.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00084 
PMCID: PMC7005600
PMID: 32082226 


436. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Feb 17;17(4). pii: E1290. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17041290.

Energy Drink Consumption, Depression, and Salutogenic Sense of Coherence Among
Adolescents and Young Adults.

Tóth Á(1), Soós R(2), Szovák E(2), Najbauer NM(3), Tényi D(4), Csábí G(5),
Wilhelm M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Sport Sciences and Physical Education, Faculty of Science,
University of Pécs, H-7624 Pécs, Hungary.
(2)Doctoral School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of 
Pécs, H-7621 Pécs, Hungary.
(3)Institute of English Studies, University of Pécs, H-7624 Pécs, Hungary.
(4)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Pécs, H-7623 Pécs,
Hungary.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Pécs, H-7623
Pécs, Hungary.

The prevalence of energy drink consumption has increased in Hungary over the past
10-15 years. This study assesses the frequency, motivations, and adverse effects 
of energy drink consumption, and examines how the process of becoming a regular
consumer is connected with sense of coherence and depression symptoms. A total of
631 high school and college students were assessed using the Depression Scale
(BDS-13) and Sense of Coherence Scale (SOC-13). Logistic regression models were
fit to test the effect of and links between factors influencing addiction to
energy drink use. A total of 31.1% (95% CI: 27.4-34.7) of those surveyed consumed
energy drinks, 24.0% of those affected consumed the energy drink with alcohol,
71.4% (95% CI: 64.7-77.3) experienced adverse effects following energy drink
consumption, and 10.2% (95% CI: 6.7-15.2) experienced at least four symptoms
simultaneously. The most common motivations of consumption were fatigue, taste,
and fun. Obtained by multivariate logistic regression models, after adjustment
for sex and age, SOC and tendency to depression had a significant influence on
the respondents' odds of addiction. The tendency to depression increases the
chances of addiction, while a strong sense of coherence diminishes the effects of
depression. Young people in Hungary have been shown to consume energy drinks in
quantities that are detrimental to their health. Complex preventive measures and 
programs are needed to address the problem. Families and educators should strive 
to instill a strong sense of coherence in children from an early age.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17041290 
PMCID: PMC7068601
PMID: 32079347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


437. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Feb 14;17(4). pii: E1239. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17041239.

Associations of Psychosocial Factors with Multiple Health Behaviors: A
Population-Based Study of Middle-Aged Men and Women.

Thomas K(1), Nilsson E(1), Festin K(1), Henriksson P(1)(2), Lowén M(3), Löf
M(1)(2), Kristenson M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Society and Health, Department of Medical and Health Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine and Health, Linköping University, SE-581 83 Linköping,
Sweden.
(2)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, 141 83
Huddinge, Sweden.
(3)Department of Health and Care Development, and Division of Community Medicine,
Department of Medical and Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health,
Linköping University, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden.

Background: The health behaviors smoking, risky alcohol consumption, insufficient
physical activity, and poor diet constitute the main contributors to
non-communicable diseases. Clustering of risk behaviors is common and increases
the risk of these diseases. Despite health benefits, it is difficult to change
health behaviors. Psychosocial factors could play a role in health behavior
change, with research showing relationships between unfavorable psychosocial
factors and health risk behaviors. However, many studies only investigated one or
two health behaviors at a time. The present study, therefore, aimed to
investigate associations between a broad range of psychosocial factors and
multiple health risk behaviors in a general middle-aged population in Sweden.
Methods: A cross-sectional design was used to investigate a random sample from
the general population in Sweden (n = 1007, 45-69 years, 50% women).
Questionnaire data on health behaviors (smoking, alcohol consumption, physical
activity, and fruit/vegetable intake) and psychosocial factors, with both
psychological and social resources (social integration, emotional support,
perceived control, self-esteem, sense of coherence and trust) and psychological
risk factors (cynicism, vital exhaustion, hopelessness and depressiveness), were 
analyzed. Logistic and ordinal logistic regression were used to analyze
associations between psychosocial factors and multiple (0-1, 2 or 3-4) health
risk behaviors. Results: A total of 50% of the sample had two health risk
behaviors and 18% had three health risk behaviors. After adjusting for age, sex, 
education, employment status, and immigrant status, eight out of 10 psychosocial 
factors (exceptions: social integration and self-esteem) showed significant odds 
ratios (ORs) in the expected directions; low levels of psychosocial resources and
high levels of psychosocial risk factors were associated with multiple risk
behaviors. The strongest associations with multiple risk behaviors were seen for 
vital exhaustion (adjusted (adj.) OR 1.28; confidence interval (CI) 1.11-1.46),
depressiveness (adj. OR 1.32, CI 1.14-1.52), and trust (adj. OR 0.80, CI
0.70-0.91). When controlling for all psychosocial factors in the same model, only
the association with trust remained statistically significant (adj. OR 0.89, CI
0.73-1.00, p = 0.050). Associations with individual health behaviors were fewer
and scattered, with no psychosocial factor being related to all four behaviors.
Conclusions: Examining associations between a broad range of psychosocial factors
and multiple health risk behaviors revealed consistent and significant
associations for almost all psychosocial factors. These associations were
stronger compared to associations to single health risk behaviors. Our findings
support the relevance of considering psychosocial aspects in interventions aimed 
at health behavior change, especially for people with multiple health risk
behaviors.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17041239 
PMCID: PMC7068361
PMID: 32075162  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Aging Ment Health. 2021 May;25(5):936-945. doi: 10.1080/13607863.2020.1725805.
Epub 2020 Feb 18.

Achieving healthy ageing through the perspective of sense of coherence among
senior-only households: a qualitative study.

Seah B(1), Espnes GA(2), Ang ENK(1), Lim JY(1), Kowitlawakul Y(1), Wang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Alice Lee Centre for Nursing Studies, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Department of Public Health and Nursing, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.

Objectives: Explore perceptions towards healthy ageing through the perspective of
sense of coherence among older adults residing in senior-only households.Methods:
A qualitative study using focus group interviews was conducted and appreciative
inquiry was adopted as a strengths-based interviewing approach. 27 older adults
who either live alone or with their spouses only were involved in six focus group
discussions at a community centre in Singapore. Data saturation was achieved and 
thematic analysis was performed to analyse the data.Results: The four emerging
themes were (1) contending evolving vulnerabilities, (2) intrinsic value of
health, (3) taking care of oneself is a personal responsibility, and (4) taking
one day at a time: outlook towards later part of life. Older adults' underlying
pathogenic orientation towards health contributed to their perceived
unpredictable confrontations with vicissitudes including illness and death. This 
played a part to their short outlook towards old age. Consequently, this could
limit their will and abilities to seek meaningful pursuits or valued aspirations 
and movement towards the salutogenic health pole.Conclusion: By reframing the
definition of health to pursuing and fulfilling valued accomplishments, optimal
health can be achieved regardless of physical health state. This study suggested 
that sense of coherence towards the pursuit of healthy ageing can be addressed by
reducing the unpredictability of ageing-related processes and vulnerabilities
(comprehensibility), supporting active adoption of actions which promotes
physical, mental and social health (manageability) and individual reflection in
making sense of old age to seek motivation in living each day purposefully
(meaningfulness).

DOI: 10.1080/13607863.2020.1725805 
PMID: 32067465  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Health Promot Int. 2020 Dec 1;35(6):1543-1550. doi: 10.1093/heapro/daaa004.

The medicalization of cancer as socially constructed and culturally negotiated.

Fries CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sociology and Criminology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada R3T 2N2.

Sociological considerations of medicalization frequently employ a limited use of 
the term that focuses on the transformation of social phenomena into issues
subject to medical control. Informed by a salutogenic perspective, this essay
argues that it is possible to understand cancer as having been medicalized. I
show that far from exclusively a biophysical issue, the medicalization of cancer 
is a socially constructed and culturally negotiated process, with a fairly recent
historical origin. While changing social relations of healing have led our
medico-centric culture to a near single-minded understanding of cancer as a
cellular pathology rooted in biology, Antonovsky's salutogenic perspective
instructs that it is possible to understand and control cancer in non-medicalized
ways. Indoor radon gas remediation is presented as an illustration of what form
salutary cancer control and disease prevention may take.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/daaa004 
PMID: 32065625 


440. BMC Public Health. 2020 Feb 14;20(1):233. doi: 10.1186/s12889-020-8181-3.

Health-promoting factors in higher education for a sustainable working life -
protocol for a multicenter longitudinal study.

Lindmark U(1), Ahlstrand I(2), Ekman A(3), Berg L(4), Hedén L(5), Källstrand
J(6), Larsson M(7), Nunstedt H(8), Oxelmark L(4), Pennbrant S(8), Sundler A(5),
Larsson I(6); Impact within the Swedish framework for “Health Research in
Collaboration”.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Oral Health, Department of Natural Science and Biomedicine, School 
of Health and Welfare, Jönköping University, Jönköping, Sweden.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation, School of Health and Welfare, Jönköping
University, Jönköping, Sweden. inger.ahlstrand@ju.se.
(3)Department of Social Work, School of Health and Welfare, Jönköping University,
Jönköping, Sweden.
(4)Institute of Health and Care Sciences, the Sahlgrenska Academy, University of 
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)Faculty of Caring Science, Work Life, and Social Welfare, University of Borås,
Borås, Sweden.
(6)School of Health and Welfare, Halmstad University, Halmstad, Sweden.
(7)School of Health and Education, University of Skövde, Skövde, Sweden.
(8)Department of Health Sciences, University West, Trollhättan, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The World Health Organization has highlighted the importance of
health promotion for health service providers in order to ensure sustainable
working life for individuals involved in providing health services. Such
sustainability begins when students are preparing to manage their own future
health and welfare in working life. It has been suggested that universities,
employees and trainee health professionals should adopt or follow a salutogenic
approach that not only complements the providing of information on known health
risks but also favors health promotion strategies. This paper describes the study
design and data collection methods in a planned study aiming to explore
health-promoting factors for a sustainable working life among students in higher 
education within healthcare and social work.
METHODS: This protocol describes a multicenter longitudinal study involving
Swedish students on higher education programs in the healthcare and social work
sectors. In 2018, the study invited students on seven education programs at six
universities to participate. These programs were for qualification as: biomedical
laboratory scientists (n = 121); dental hygienists (n = 87); nurses (n = 1411);
occupational therapists (n = 111); physiotherapists (n = 48); radiographers
(n = 60); and, social workers (n = 443). In total, 2283 students were invited to 
participate. Participants completed a baseline, a self-reported questionnaire
including six validated instruments measuring health-promoting factors and
processes. There are to be five follow-up questionnaires. Three while the
students are studying, one a year after graduating, and one three years after
graduating. Each questionnaire captures different health-promoting dimensions,
namely: health-promoting resources (i.e. sense of coherence); occupational
balance; emotional intelligence; health and welfare; social interaction; and work
and workplace experiences/perceptions.
DISCUSSION: This study focuses on the vastly important aspect of promoting a
sustainable working life for healthcare and social work employees. In contrast to
previous studies in this area, the present study uses different, validated
instruments in health promotion, taking a salutogenic approach. It is hoped that,
by stimulating the implementation of new strategies, the study's findings will
lead to education programs that prepare students better for a sustainable working
life in healthcare and social work.

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-020-8181-3 
PMCID: PMC7023742
PMID: 32059653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Perspect Psychol Sci. 2020 May;15(3):669-690. doi: 10.1177/1745691619895047. Epub
2020 Feb 13.

Mystical and Other Alterations in Sense of Self: An Expanded Framework for
Studying Nonordinary Experiences.

Taves A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Religious Studies, University of California, Santa Barbara.

Although many researchers in psychology, religious studies, and psychiatry
recognize that there is overlap in the experiences their subjects recount,
disciplinary silos and challenges involved in comparing reported experiences have
left us with little understanding of the mechanisms, whether biological,
psychological, and/or sociocultural, through which these experiences are
represented and differentiated. So-called mystical experiences, which some
psychologists view as potentially sui generis, provide a test case for assessing 
whether we can develop an expanded framework for studying unusual experiences
across disciplines and cultures. Evidence for the special nature of "mystical
experience" rests on the operationalization of a metaphysically untestable
construct in two widely used self-report scales: the Mysticism Scale and the
Mystical Experiences Questionnaire. Consideration of the construct in light of
research on alterations in sense of self induced by psychoactive drugs and
meditation practices suggests that "positive experiences of undifferentiated
unity" are not sui generis, but rather a type of "ego dissolution." To better
understand the nature and effects of unusual experiences, such as alterations in 
the sense of self, we need self-report measures that distinguish between
generically worded experiences and the way they are appraised in terms of
valence, significance, cause, and long-term effects in different contexts.

DOI: 10.1177/1745691619895047 
PMID: 32053465  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Braz Oral Res. 2020 Feb 7;34:e009. doi: 10.1590/1807-3107bor-2020.vol34.0009.
eCollection 2020.

Effect of the sense of coherence and associated factors in the quality of life of
head and neck cancer patients.

Bonzanini LIL(1), Soldera EB(2), Ortigara GB(2), Schulz RE(2), Knorst JK(2),
Ardenghi TM(2), Ferrazzo KL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), School of Dentistry,
Department of Surgery and Orthopedics, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(2)Universidade Federal de Santa Maria (UFSM), School of Dentistry, Department of
Stomatology, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(3)Universidade Federal de Santa Maria (UFSM), School of Dentistry, Department of
Pathology, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.

The sense of coherence (SOC) is a measure of global orientation regarding the
ability of individuals to cope with stressful situations. The aim of the present 
study was to evaluate the association between SOC and quality of life (QoL) and
clinical and sociodemographic characteristics among survivors of oral,
oropharynx, hypopharynx, or larynx cancer. A cross-sectional study was conducted 
with 90 cancer patients in follow up at the Santa Maria University Hospital in
southern Brazil who had completed conformal 3D radiotherapy at least three months
earlier. QoL was assessed using the University of Washington Quality of Life
(UW-QOL) questionnaire and SOC was measured using the Brazilian version of the
SOC-13 questionnaire. Data on socio-demographic characteristics and the disease
were obtained from patients' charts. Oral clinical conditions were also
evaluated. Associations between exploratory variables and mean UW-QOL scores were
evaluated through Poisson regression and the results were presented as rate
ratios (RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). The mean overall UW-QOL score was 
67.90 (± 18.71). Moderate and high SOC scores were associated with higher mean
UW-QOL scores, that is, individuals with a stronger SOC demonstrated better QoL, 
(p < 0.05). Regarding the clinical variables, individuals with advanced stage
cancer and those with hyposalivation and trismus had poorer QoL (p < 0.05).
Patients with a greater SOC reported a better quality of life. Our findings show 
the importance of focusing on psychosocial factors, which can alleviate the
impact caused by the disease and improve the QoL of these patients.

DOI: 10.1590/1807-3107bor-2020.vol34.0009 
PMID: 32049110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. 2020 Jun;48(3):215-224. doi: 10.1111/cdoe.12518.
Epub 2020 Feb 11.

The role of psychosocial factors and treatment need in dental service use and
oral health among adults in Norway.

Jönsson B(1)(2), Holde GE(2)(3), Baker SR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Institute of Odontology, The Sahlgrenska
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)The Public Dental Health Service Competence Centre of Northern Norway, Tromsø,
Norway.
(3)Department of Clinical Dentistry, Faculty of Health Sciences, UiT the Arctic
University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
(4)Academic Unit of Oral Health, Dentistry and Society, School of Clinical
Dentistry, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.

OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to explore whether population characteristics were
associated with the use of dental services, individual's personal oral health
practices, dental caries and oral health-related impacts using the revised
Andersen's behavioural model as the theoretical framework.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study included participants from a Norwegian
general population (N = 1840; 20-79 years) included in the Tromstannen-Oral
Health in Northern Norway (TOHNN) study. The variables included in the model were
social structure (income, education, urbanization), sense of coherence (SOC),
enabling resources (difficulties accessing the dentist, declined treatment,
dental anxiety), treatment need, use of dental services, toothbrushing frequency,
sugary soda drink consumption, decayed teeth and oral health-related impacts
(OHIP-14). Structural equation modelling was used to test the direct and indirect
effects within Andersen's behavioural model of access and health outcomes.
RESULTS: Andersen's behavioural model fit the data well and explained a large
part of the variance in use of dental services (58%), oral health-related impacts
(48%) and, to a lesser extent, decayed teeth (12%). More social structures and a 
stronger SOC was associated with more enabling resources, which in turn, was
associated with more use of dental services. Social structures were not directly 
associated with use of dental services or decayed teeth but were predictive of
oral health-related impacts. A stronger SOC was associated with more frequent
toothbrushing, less soda drink consumptions, fewer decayed teeth and less oral
health-related impacts. Self-perceived need did not predict dental attendance but
was associated with decayed teeth. A less frequent use of dental services, less
frequent toothbrushing and more frequent sugary soda drink consumption were
associated with more decayed teeth. Decayed teeth were not associated with oral
health-related impacts.
CONCLUSION: The findings suggests that, in addition to focusing on reducing
socioeconomic inequalities in relation to oral health in the Norwegian
population, it is also important to consider how people perceive their own
resources (eg financial, psychological, social) as well as their access to dental
care in order to support regular dental attendance and potentially, in turn,
enhance oral health.

© 2020 The Authors. Community Dentistry and Oral Epidemiology published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cdoe.12518 
PMID: 32048318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Evid Based Nurs. 2021 Jan;24(1):8. doi: 10.1136/ebnurs-2019-103173. Epub 2020 Feb
11.

College suicide prevention programmes are most effective when they incorporate
students' sense of coherence and connectedness in their design.

Ghassemi AE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nursing Department, Hartwick College, Oneonta, New York, USA
ghassemia@hartwick.edu.

Comment on
    J Affect Disord. 2019 Sep 1;256:192-204.

DOI: 10.1136/ebnurs-2019-103173 
PMID: 32046967  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


445. PLoS One. 2020 Feb 11;15(2):e0228754. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0228754.
eCollection 2020.

The Barcelona Brain Health Initiative: Cohort description and first follow-up.

Cattaneo G(1)(2), Bartrés-Faz D(1)(3), Morris TP(1)(4), Solana Sánchez J(1)(2),
Macià D(1)(3), Tormos JM(1)(2), Pascual-Leone A(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Guttmann, Institut Universitari de Neurorehabilitació adscrit a la
UAB, Badalona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Departament de Medicina, Facultat de Medicina i Ciències de la Salut,
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Berenson-Allen Center for Noninvasive Brain Stimulation, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States of America.
(5)Hinda and Arthur Marcus Institute for Aging Research, Hebrew SeniorLife,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States of America.

The Barcelona Brain Health Initiative is a longitudinal cohort study that began
in 2017 and aims to understand and characterize the determinants of brain health 
maintenance in middle aged adults. A cohort of 4686 individuals between the ages 
of 40 and 65 years free from any neurological or psychiatric diseases was
established, and we collected extensive demographic, socio-economic information
along with measures of self-perceived health and lifestyles (general health,
physical activity, cognitive activity, socialization, sleep, nutrition and vital 
plan). Here we report on the baseline characteristics of the participants, and
the results of the one-year follow-up evaluation. Participants were mainly women,
highly educated, and with better lifestyles compared with the general population.
After one year 60% of participants completed the one-year follow-up, and these
were older, with higher educational level and with better lifestyles in some
domains. In the absence of any specific interventions to-date, these participants
showed small improvements in physical activity and sleep, but decreased adherence
to a Mediterranean diet. These changes were negatively associated with baseline
scores, and poorer habits at baseline were predictive of an improvement in
lifestyle domains. Of the 2353 participants who completed the one-year follow-up,
73 had been diagnosed with new neurological and neuropsychiatric diseases.
Changes in vital plan at follow-up, as well as gender, sleep quality and sense of
coherence at baseline were shown to be significant risk factors for the onset of 
these diagnoses. Notably, gender risk factor decreased in importance as we
adjusted by sleep habits, suggesting its potential mediator effects. These
findings stress the importance of healthy lifestyles in sustaining brain health, 
and illustrate the individual benefit that can be derived from participation in
longitudinal observational studies. Modifiable lifestyles, specifically quality
of sleep, may partially mediate the effect of other risk factors in the
development of some neuropsychiatric conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0228754 
PMCID: PMC7012435
PMID: 32045448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We have the following interests: Dr. A.
Pascual-Leone serves on the scientific advisory boards for Neuronix, Starlab
Neuroscience, Neuroelectrics, Magstim, Magventure, Constant Therapy, and Neosync;
and is listed as an inventor on several issued and pending patents on the
real-time integration of transcranial magnetic stimulation with
electroencephalography and magnetic resonance imaging: 1. Method and Apparatus
for Recording an Electroencephalogram During Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation.
US 6,266,556 B1. (Application 09/067,111; filed Apr 27, 1998) 2. Method and
Apparatus for Monitoring a Magnetic Resonance Image During Transcranial Magnetic 
Stimulation. US 6,198,958 B1. (Application 09/096,725; filed Jan 11, 1998) 3.
Method and Apparatus for Recording an Electroencephalogram During Transcranial
Magnetic Stimulation.US 6,571,123 B2.(Application 09/746,055; filed Dec 21, 2000;
prior publication data US 2002/0007128 A1 Jan 17, 2002) 4. A. Pascual-Leone And
T. Wagner. Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) Methods and Apparatus.US
2010/0113959 A1. (Application 10/731892; filed Dec 9. 2003) 5. System and Methods
for Applying Signals, Including Contralesional Signals, to Neural Populations. US
2007/0288072 A1. (Application 11/697,696l filed Apr 6, 2007) 6. Transcranial
Magnetic Stimulation Methods and Apparatus. US 2010/0210894 A1 2007 Dec 1. 7.
Method and System for Safely Guide Interventions in a Procedure where the
Substrate is Neural Plasticity. (International Application PCT/ES2008/000677;
filed Oct 31, 2008; corresponding US Application US 2011213213. 8. Methods for
treating and/or collecting information regarding neurological disorders,
including language disorders. US 7,565,199 B2. (Application 10/731,892; filed Dec
9, 2003; provisional application 60/432,073; filed Dec 9, 2002) 9. Method and
System for Treating Amblyopia. US 13/200,080. (UR 1-11030- 10035; filed Sept 16, 
2010) 10. Non-invasive methods for evaluating cortical plasticity impairments. US
2011/0224571 A1 (Application 12/947491; filed Nov 16, 2010) 11. Methods for
treating and/or collecting information regarding neurological disorders,
including language disorders. US 08050767. (Application 11/935135; filed November
5, 2007) 12. Device for treating human vision using combined optical and
electrical stimulation. (Application 12/883,423; filed Sep 16, 2010; provisional 
application 60/886,073; filed Jan 22, 2007) 13. A Method for Treating Neuropathic
Pain. (Application 13/197,883; filed Aug 4, 2011) 14. Identification of optimized
therapeutic TMS targets for depression based on functional connectivity MRI (USSN
provisional application 61/648,032 filed May 16, 2012) 15. System and Method for 
Treating Neuropathic Pain. (Application EP12380025; filed May 18, 2012) 16.
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) methods and apparatus.- US Patent
20,130,338,424, 2013 17. A method and a system for optimizing the configuration
of multisite Transcranial current stimulation and a computer-readable medium. US 
nº 14/058,517 (Filed Oct 21, 2013) 18. Identifying Individual Target Sites for
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Applications. Application Number 14/401,296;
Filed November 14, 2014. However, their potential field of exploitation is not
related with the content of the manuscript. Josep M. Tormos is a listed
co-inventor in the following patents: 1. A method for treating neuropatic pain
(US 13/197,883) 2. Method and system to safely guide interventions in procedures 
the substrate whereof is neural plasticity (PCT/ES2008/000677) However, he has no
ownership of the industrial property for those patents nor is their potential
field of exploitation related with the content of the manuscript. Ad-Salutem
Institute, Sodexo S.A., I.C.A Informática y Comunicaciones Avanzadas,
Neuroelectrics, Corporació Catalana de Mitjans Audiovisuals, Club Metropolitan,
Casa Ametller, and Agència de Qualitat i Avaluació Sanitàries de Catalunya-AQuAS 
are commercial companies supporting the Barcelona Brain Health Initiative and
this study. There are no further patents, products in development or marketed
products to declare. This does not alter our adherence to all the PLOS ONE
policies on sharing data and materials.


446. Semin Ophthalmol. 2020 Jan 2;35(1):50-55. doi: 10.1080/08820538.2020.1723651.
Epub 2020 Feb 8.

Clinical Features of Ocular Syphilis: a Retrospective Clinical Study in an
Italian Referral Centre.

Moramarco A(1), Mallone F(1), Pirraglia MP(1), Bruscolini A(1), Giustolisi R(1), 
La Cava M(1), Lambiase A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sense Organs, University Sapienza of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Purpose: To describe the clinical characteristics and visual prognosis of ocular 
involvement in syphilis.Design: A retrospective cohort study.Methods: We studied 
the charts of 24 patients who visited our Ophthalmological Centre in Rome, Italy.
All patients with serological evidence of syphilitic infection were
included.Results: Ocular involvement was the first manifestation of syphilitic
disease in 96% and Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) seropositivity was found in
29% of the cases. The most frequent ocular manifestation was posterior uveitis.
Vitreous involvement was frequent. Patients with papillitis at onset showed
better visual outcome with antisyphilitic treatment. Posterior uveitis at onset
and HIV seropositivity were negative prognostic factors for visual outcome.
HIV-positive patients showed more severe and frequent bilateral course of ocular 
involvement in syphilis.Conclusions: The ophthalmologist should suspect syphilis 
in patien ts with uveitis or optic neuropathy associated with high-risk sexual
behaviour and/or HIV, or in patients with posterior placoid chorioretinitis,
necrotising retinitis, or interstitial keratitis.

DOI: 10.1080/08820538.2020.1723651 
PMID: 32036734  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs. 2020 Mar;49(2):200-211. doi:
10.1016/j.jogn.2019.12.006. Epub 2020 Feb 6.

Development and Testing of the Preparation for Labor and Birth Instrument.

Neerland CE, Avery MD, Looman WS, Saftner MA, Rockwood TH, Gurvich OV.

OBJECTIVE: To develop and assess the reliability and validity of a new instrument
used during the third trimester of pregnancy to measure women's confidence in
their ability to achieve physiologic birth, the Preparation for Labor and Birth
(P-LAB) instrument.
DESIGN: Two-phase instrument development study that consisted of item generation 
and a prospective field test.
SETTING: Field testing occurred in five midwestern U.S. prenatal clinics.
PARTICIPANTS: Participants in the field test were 203 nulliparous and parous
pregnant women who intended to give birth vaginally.
METHODS: Psychometric testing consisted of test-retest reliability testing and
assessments of content validity, face validity, and construct validity. We
measured construct validity using exploratory factor analysis and correlation
with the Sense of Coherence Scale.
RESULTS: The 22-item P-LAB showed good content validity, good internal
consistency, and stability over time. All items had content validity index scores
greater than or equal to 0.8, and the total instrument content validity index was
0.95. We identified four factors related to women's confidence in their ability
to achieve physiologic birth: Planned Use of Pain Medication, Relationship With
Care Provider and Supportive Birth Environment, Beliefs About Labor, and Labor
Support (social and professional). Cronbach's alpha coefficient for the four
extracted factors were .93, .76, .73 and .74, respectively. Intraclass
correlation [95% confidence interval] for the total questionnaire was .92 [.88,
.94]. We found no linear association between total P-LAB scores and sense of
coherence.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate acceptable initial psychometric properties
for the P-LAB instrument. Additional testing is required to evaluate the
instrument's construct, convergent, and divergent validity.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jogn.2019.12.006 
PMID: 32035974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2020 Apr;20(2):427-440. doi:
10.3758/s13415-020-00777-6.

Keep your interoceptive streams under control: An active inference perspective on
anorexia nervosa.

Barca L(1), Pezzulo G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cognitive Science and Technologies, ISTC-CNR, Via San Martino
della Battaglia, 44, 00141, Rome, Italy. laura.barca@istc.cnr.it.
(2)Institute of Cognitive Science and Technologies, ISTC-CNR, Via San Martino
della Battaglia, 44, 00141, Rome, Italy.

Anorexia nervosa (AN) is a psychiatric disorder primarily characterized by
"restriction of energy intake relative to requirements leading to a significantly
low body weight in the context of age, sex, developmental trajectory, and
physical health" (DSM-5, n.d.). Here, we propose a novel interpretation of food
restriction of AN, which elaborates on recent accounts of the brain as a
predictive machine, continuously inferring and controling incoming signals,
including bodily signals - i.e., interoceptive (active) inference. In this
perspective, the extreme eating restrictions characterizing AN may serve the
fundamental role of keeping under control (i.e., reducing excessively high levels
of) interoceptive uncertainty, above and beyond controlling and mitigating
concerns for body weight. In other words, noisy interoceptive streams may
instantiate active strategies (i.e., eating restrictions) that amplify autonomic 
hunger signals, to minimize interoceptive uncertainty and maintain a more
coherent sense of (interoceptive) self.

DOI: 10.3758/s13415-020-00777-6 
PMID: 32034686  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Int J Clin Health Psychol. 2020 Jan-Apr;20(1):1-9. doi:
10.1016/j.ijchp.2019.10.001. Epub 2019 Nov 14.

Salutogenic constructs across Pakistan and Germany: A cross sectional study.

Bibi A(1), Lin M(1), Margraf J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mental Health Research and Treatment Center, Faculty of Psychology,
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany.

Background/Objective: Protective factors are relevant for mental health in
general, however, universality of the instruments has been rarely tested.
Therefore, the current study aimed to examine psychometric properties and
cross-cultural measurement invariance of salutogenic constructs.
Method: Data was collected from university students of Pakistan (n = 1,841) and
Germany (n = 7,890). Single-group confirmatory analysis (CFA) and multiple-group 
CFA was tested to examine the proposed factor structure and measurement
invariance of Positive Mental Health Scale, Resilience Scale, Perceived Social
Support Questionnaire, and Life Satisfaction Scale across student samples from
Pakistan and Germany respectively.
Results: We found strong measurement invariance for the Positive Mental Health
Scale, Life Satisfaction Scale, and partial strong measurement for the Resilience
Scale, and Perceived Social Support Questionnaire.
Conclusions: The results indicate that these scales could be recommended for the 
meaningful comparison of latent means across cultures. Understanding these
differences would further advance our knowledge about the mechanism underlying
positive mental health.

Publisher: Los factores de protección son relevantes para la salud mental en
general. Sin embargo, la universalidad de los instrumentos ha sido raramente
probada. Por lo tanto, el presente estudio tiene como objetivo examinar las
propiedades psicométricas y la invariabilidad de las mediciones interculturales
de constructos salutogénicos.Se recogieron datos de estudiantes universitarios de
Pakistán (n = 1.841) y Alemania (n = 7.890). El análisis confirmatorio de un solo
grupo (CFA) y el CFA de múltiples grupos fueron probados para examinar la
estructura de factores propuesta y la invariabilidad de la medición de la Escala 
de Salud Mental Positiva, la Escala de Resiliencia, el Cuestionario de Apoyo
Social Percibido y la Escala de Satisfacción de Vida a través de muestras de
estudiantes de Pakistán y Alemania, respectivamente.Encontramos una fuerte
invariancia en las mediciones de la Positive Mental Health Scale, la Life
Satisfaction Scale, y una medición parcial fuerte en la Resilience Scale y el
Perceived Social Support Questionnaire.Los resultados indican que estas escalas
podrían recomendarse para la comparación significativa de los medios latentes
entre culturas. La comprensión de estas diferencias aumentaría aún más nuestro
conocimiento sobre el mecanismo que subyace a la salud mental positiva.
© 2019 Asociación Española de Psicología Conductual. Published by Elsevier
España, S.L.U.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijchp.2019.10.001 
PMCID: PMC6994757
PMID: 32021613 


450. J Multidiscip Healthc. 2020 Jan 17;13:63-70. doi: 10.2147/JMDH.S233313.
eCollection 2020.

Barriers to Quality of Care for Cancer Patients in Rural Areas: A Study from the 
Faroe Islands.

Joensen BM(1), Nielsen S(2), Róin Á(3).

Author information: 
(1)Naina, Recreation Home, Tórshavn, Faroe Islands.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, National Hospital, Tórshavn, Faroe Islands.
(3)Department of Health and Nursing Science, University of the Faroe Islands,
Tórshavn, Faroe Islands.

Introduction: Research has indicated that cancer patients living in rural areas
receive poorer quality of treatment and care than their urban counterparts. With 
a population of approximately 51,000, the Faroe Islands may be characterized as a
small-scale, rural society. Due to the geographical location and size of the
Faroe Islands, patients who live there often receive part of their treatment
abroad. Although a shift in the focus of cancer care from a disease-focused
approach to a person-centered approach has been successfully implemented
elsewhere, legal and structural conditions unique to the Faroe Islands might
prohibit the realization of this paradigmatic shift in the Faroe Islands. The aim
of this qualitative study was to examine how Faroese cancer patients have
experienced their disease, treatment, and care and provide additional knowledge
on cancer patients living in small-scale and rural societies.
Methods: Five men and three women who had been through a cancer treatment course 
with a good prognosis volunteered to be interviewed. Their ages varied from 40 to
80 years. "Active interviewing", a constructionist approach to qualitative
interviewing and latent thematic analysis, was applied.
Results: Three overlapping themes were identified from the categories: sense of
coherence, resources and challenges in everyday life, and trust in the system.
The analysis uncovered multiple factors related to legal and structural
conditions that were barriers to ensuring the quality of cancer care for
patients, for instance, shifting consultants, a lack of coherence in treatment,
information loss and insufficient contact with cancer nurse specialists.
Discussion: This study is based on a limited number of participants. However, the
findings from this study provide insight into the special conditions of cancer
patients living in a small-scale, rural society and help explain disparities in
the quality of cancer treatment and care between urban and rural areas.

© 2020 Joensen et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JMDH.S233313 
PMCID: PMC6974407
PMID: 32021235 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.


451. J Rural Med. 2020 Jan;15(1):38-43. doi: 10.2185/jrm.2019-001. Epub 2020 Jan 23.

Relationship between mortality risk and health-related factors and sense of
coherence in residents ofa rural area in Japan.

Yamauchi K(1), Kato T(2), Saito I(3), Yamaizumi M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Faculty of Psychology, Hiroshima International
University, Japan.
(2)Center for Education and Educational Research, the Faculty of Education, Ehime
University, Japan.
(3)Department of Public Health and Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, Oita
University, Japan.
(4)JA Ehime Kouseiren Medical Examination Center, Japan.

Objective: This study aimed to examine the relationship between mortality risk
and health-related factors and sense of coherence (SOC) in a cohort study of
residents from a rural area of Japan. Materials and Methods: We followed-up with 
3,416 baseline respondents over 3.76 years. Residents were subdivided into three 
groups based on SOC score: low, middle, and high. We used the total SOC score of 
the low-level SOC group as the standard, and calculated the standardized
mortality ratio (SMR) for the middle- and high-level SOC groups. For all three
SOC groups, health-related factors were analyzed by one-way analysis of variance,
and lifestyle and history were analyzed using the χ2 test. Results were also
analyzed by gender and age. Results: For men in the low-level SOC group, the SMR 
value was defined as 1, and for men in the high-level SOC group (0.44; 95%
confidence interval: 0.11-0.77), the SMR value was significantly lower. There was
a statistically significant reduction in the percentage of smokers in the men in 
the high-level SOC group. Conclusion: In this study, high-level SOC was
associated with low mortality risk. This finding was particularly pronounced in
the men.

©2020 The Japanese Association of Rural Medicine.

DOI: 10.2185/jrm.2019-001 
PMCID: PMC6983456
PMID: 32015780 

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have declared no conflicts of
interest.


452. Ann Sci. 2019 Jul - Oct;76(3-4):241-266. doi: 10.1080/00033790.2019.1702718. Epub
2020 Feb 3.

Between Kepler and Newton: Hooke's 'principles of congruity and incongruity' and 
the naturalization of mathematics.

Gal O(1), Hodoba Eric C(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of History and Philosophy of Science, University of Sydney, Sydney,
Australia.

Robert Hooke's development of the theory of matter-as-vibration provides
coherence to a career in natural philosophy which is commonly perceived as
scattered and haphazard. It also highlights aspects of his work for which he is
rarely credited: besides the creative speculative imagination and
practical-instrumental ingenuity for which he is known, it displays lucid and
consistent theoretical thought and mathematical skills. Most generally and
importantly, however, Hooke's 'Principles … of Congruity and Incongruity of
bodies' represent a uniquely powerful approach to the most pressing challenge of 
the New Science: legitimizing the application of mathematics to the study of
nature. This challenge required reshaping the mathematical practices and
procedures; an epistemological framework supporting these practices; and a
metaphysics which could make sense of this epistemology. Hooke's 'Uniform
Geometrical or Mechanical Method' was a bold attempt to answer the three
challenges together, by interweaving mathematics through physics into metaphysics
and epistemology. Mathematics, in his rendition, was neither an abstract and
ideal structure (as it was for Kepler), nor a wholly-flexible, artificial human
tool (as it was for Newton). It drew its power from being contingent on the
particularities of the material world.

DOI: 10.1080/00033790.2019.1702718 
PMID: 32013781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


453. AJOB Neurosci. 2020 Jan-Mar;11(1):24-25. doi: 10.1080/21507740.2019.1704924.

Thematic Coherence Within Narratives: A Feature or a Bug?

Goldberg N(1), Malkowsky V(1), Ohana T(1), Greenbaum D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zvi Meitar Institute for Legal Implications of Emerging Technologies.

Comment on
    AJOB Neurosci. 2020 Jan-Mar;11(1):7-17.

DOI: 10.1080/21507740.2019.1704924 
PMID: 32009593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Child Abuse Negl. 2020 Mar;101:104388. doi: 10.1016/j.chiabu.2020.104388. Epub
2020 Jan 31.

The relationship between cumulative traumatic experiences and ICD-11
post-traumatic symptoms in children and adolescents in foster care: The mediating
effect of sense of coherence.

Sölva K(1), Haselgruber A(2), Lueger-Schuster B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Psychotraumatology, Department of Applied Psychology, Faculty of
Psychology, University of Vienna, Wächtergasse 1, 1010 Vienna, Austria.
Electronic address: katharina.soelva@univie.ac.at.
(2)Unit of Psychotraumatology, Department of Applied Psychology, Faculty of
Psychology, University of Vienna, Wächtergasse 1, 1010 Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Children and adolescents in foster care show a high prevalence of
cumulative traumatic experiences (CTE), symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) and symptoms related to disturbances in self-organization (DSO). PTSD and 
DSO constitute the ICD-11 diagnosis Complex PTSD (CPTSD). Sense of coherence
(SOC) has been shown to alleviate the impact of CTE.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the mediating role of SOC in the
relationship between CTE, PTSD, and DSO.
PARTICIPANTS AND SETTING: Trauma history (CTE), PTSD, DSO and SOC were assessed
in a sample of 140 children and adolescents in foster care aged 10-18 using
self-report questionnaires.
METHOD: Mediation analysis determined the direct, indirect and total effect of
the mediation of SOC in the relationship between CTE, PTSD and DSO.
RESULTS: The results showed no mediation of SOC in the relationship between CTE
and PTSD symptoms (indirect effect of b = -.001, 95 %CI: -.088-.086). However,
SOC mediated the relationship between CTE and DSO symptoms (indirect effect b =
.128, 95 %CI: 0.045-.211).
CONCLUSIONS: Those results may point to a promotive function of SOC for the
overall development and different areas of self-organization, but not for PTSD
symptoms. It is possible that the influence of the trauma on symptoms of PTSD is 
too pervasive for the promotive function of SOC. The present findings strengthen 
the assumption that PTSD and DSO are separate second-order factors, which
characterize different groups of trauma survivors. The present findings are vital
to inform tailored prevention and intervention strategies for survivors of early 
CTE.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chiabu.2020.104388 
PMID: 32007791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors of 
this manuscript report no conflict of interest.


455. Maturitas. 2020 Mar;133:7-12. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2019.12.009. Epub 2019 Dec
12.

Psychological behavior patterns and coping with menopausal symptoms among users
and non-users of hormone replacement therapy in Finnish cohorts of women aged
52-56 years.

Jalava-Broman J(1), Junttila N(2), Sillanmäki L(3), Mäkinen J(4), Rautava P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. Electronic
address: jaana.jalava-broman@utu.fi.
(2)Department of Teacher Education, Centre for Education and Research on Social
Health Services, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(3)Department of Public Health, University of Turku, Turku, Finland; Turku
Clinical Research Centre, Turku University Hospital, Finland; Department of
Public Health, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Turku, Turku University
Hospital, Turku, Finland.
(5)Department of Public Health, University of Turku, Turku, Finland; Turku
Clinical Research Centre, Turku University Hospital, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: To identify subgroups of women who differ with respect to
self-evaluated stress, hostility, optimism and sense of coherence, and to
identify differences, if any, in whether these subgroups use or do not use
hormone replacement therapy (HT).
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: This time-trend study is based on the Finnish national 
HeSSup study, in which nationwide cohorts of Finnish women aged 52-56 years
randomly selected in 2000 (n = 1321) and in 2010 (n = 1389) responded to postal
questionnaires related to four psychological behavior patterns.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Relationships between psychological behavior patterns
(stress, hostility, optimism and sense of coherence) and how menopausal symptoms 
are experienced and how this relates to the use of HT.
RESULTS: The proportion of HT users was higher among those with more stress and
hostility and less optimism and sense of coherence than among those low in stress
and hostility and high in optimism and sense of coherence.
CONCLUSIONS: Differences in psychological behavior patterns influence the
perception of menopausal symptoms and the use of HT. When the treatment of women 
at menopause is planned, psychological behavior patterns should be considered, as
these reflect the ability to cope with menopausal symptoms.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2019.12.009 
PMID: 32005426  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Ann Work Expo Health. 2020 Mar 10;64(3):223-235. doi: 10.1093/annweh/wxaa003.

Defining 'Integration' for Total Worker Health®: A New Proposal.

Punnett L(1), Cavallari JM(2), Henning RA(3), Nobrega S(1), Dugan AG(4),
Cherniack MG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Promotion of Health in the New England Workplace, University of
Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Public Health Sciences, UConn School of Medicine, Farmington,
CT, USA.
(3)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT,
USA.
(4)Division of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, UConn Health, Farmington,
CT, USA.

The effects of work and the conditions of employment on health behaviors and
intermediate health conditions have been demonstrated, to the extent that these
relationships should be addressed in efforts to prevent chronic disease. However,
conventional health promotion practice generally focuses on personal risk factors
and individual behavior change. In an effort to find solutions to the myriad of
health challenges faced by the American workforce, the U.S. National Institute
for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) established the Total Worker Health®
(TWH) program. Originally organized around the paradigm of integrating
traditional occupational safety and health protections with workplace health
promotion, TWH has evolved to a broader emphasis on workplace programs for
enhancing worker safety, health, and well-being. Among the research programs and 
approaches developed by investigators at NIOSH Centers of Excellence for TWH and 
elsewhere, definitions of 'integration' in workplace interventions vary widely.
There is no consensus about which organizational or individual outcomes are the
most salient, how much to emphasize organizational contexts of work, or which
program elements are necessary in order to qualify as 'Total Worker Health'.
Agreement about the dimensions of integration would facilitate comparison of
programs and interventions which are self-defined as TWH, although diverse in
content. The specific criteria needed to define integration should be unique to
that concept-i.e. distinct from and additive to conventional criteria for
predicting or evaluating the success of a workplace health program. We propose a 
set of four TWH-specific metrics for integrated interventions that address both
program content and process: (i) coordination and interaction of workplace
programs across domains; (ii) assessment of both work and non-work exposures;
(iii) emphasis on interventions to make the workplace more health-promoting; and 
(iv) participatory engagement of workers in pivotal ways during intervention
prioritization and planning to develop self-efficacy in addressing root causes,
skill transfer, building program ownership, empowerment, and continuous
improvement. Thus we find that integration requires organizational change, both
to engage two managerial functions with different goals, legal responsibilities, 
and (often) internal incentives & resources, and also to orient the organization 
toward salutogenesis. Examples from research activity within the Center for the
Promotion of Health in the New England Workplace illustrate how these criteria
have been applied in practice.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
British Occupational Hygiene Society.

DOI: 10.1093/annweh/wxaa003 
PMCID: PMC7064271
PMID: 32003780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2020;1191:71-90. doi: 10.1007/978-981-32-9705-0_5.

Anxiety Disorders and the Brain's Resting State Networks: From Altered
Spatiotemporal Synchronization to Psychopathological Symptoms.

Northoff G(1).

Author information: 
(1)EJLB-Michael Smith Chair for Neuroscience and Mental Health, Royal Ottawa
Healthcare Group, University of Ottawa Institute of Mental Health Research,
Ottawa, ON, Canada. georg.northoff@theroyal.ca.

Anxiety disorders include a variety of different disorders including panic
disorder (PD), social anxiety disorder (SAD), generalized anxiety disorder (GAD),
and phobias. We here focus our review on GAD, SAD, and PD and put a specific
emphasis on resting state networks and the coupling between the brain and the
heart as all anxiety disorders exhibit abnormal perception of their own heartbeat
in some way or the other. Resting state functional connectivity (rsFC) studies
demonstrate abnormalities in default-mode network (DMN) in all anxiety disorders,
e.g., mostly decreases in rsFC of DMN. In contrast, resting state fMRI shows
increased rsFC in salience network (SN) (SAD, GAD) and/or somato-motor/sensory
network (SMN) (PD). Since rsFC is coherence- or phase-based operating in the
infraslow frequency domain (0.01-0.1 Hz), these data suggest spatiotemporal hypo-
or hyper-synchronization in DMN and SMN/SN, respectively. These abnormalities in 
the neural network's spatiotemporal synchronization may, in turn, impact
phase-based temporal synchronization of neural and cardiac activities resulting
in decreased (DMN) or increased (SMN/SN) neuro-cardiac coupling in anxiety
disorders. That, in turn, may be related to the various psychopathological
symptoms like unstable sense of self (as based on unstable DMN showing
spatiotemporal hypo-synchronization), increased emotions and specifically anxiety
(as related to increased SN showing spatiotemporal hyper-synchronization), and
increased bodily awareness (mediated by increased SMN with spatiotemporal
hyper-synchronization) in anxiety disorders. Taken together, we here suggest
altered spatiotemporal synchronization of neural and cardiac activity within the 
brain's resting state to underlie various psychopathological symptoms in anxiety 
disorders. Such spatiotemporal basis of psychopathological symptoms is well
compatible with the recently suggested "Spatiotemporal Psychopathology."

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-32-9705-0_5 
PMID: 32002923  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Complement Ther Med. 2020 Jan;48:102231. doi: 10.1016/j.ctim.2019.102231. Epub
2019 Nov 2.

The relationship between quality of life and sense of coherence in patients
presenting for care in a chiropractic practice-based research network.

Alcantara J(1), Whetten A(2), Ohm J(3), Alcantara J(4).

Author information: 
(1)The International Chiropractic Pediatric Association, Media, PA,19063 USA;
Life Chiropractic College West, Hayward, CA, 95123, USA; Faculty of Graduate
Studies, Southern Cross University, Gold Coast, NSW, Australia. Electronic
address: dr_jalcantara@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Mathmatical Sciences, University of Wisconsis-Milwaukee,
Milwaukee, WI, USA.
(3)Private Practice of Chiropractic Media, PA, 327 N Middletown Rd, Media, 19063,
PA, USA. Electronic address: info@icpa4kids.com.
(4)International Chiropractic Pediatric Association and Private Practice of
Chiropractic 416 Meridian Rd SE A14, Calgary, Alberta, T2A 1X2, Canada.
Electronic address: joeydalcantara@yahoo.com.

INTRODUCTION: Antonovsky's sense of coherence (SOC) has been shown to positively 
correlate with quality of life (QoL). We examined the relationship between
socio-demographic data and clinical covariates along with various QoL domains to 
SOC in patients presenting for care within a chiropractic practice-based research
network.
METHODS: In addition to providing socio-demographic information and clinical
covariates, patients attending care within a PBRN completed the PROMIS-29 and
PROMIS global health to measure of QoL and SOC-29 to measure SOC at baseline. In 
addition to descriptive statistics, we utilized a random forest analysis to
assess the predictively ability of covariates to SOC.
RESULTS: Our dataset was comprised of a convenience sample of 1980 responders
(average age = 40.72 years; 1494 females and 486 males). The mean T scores
(T1/T2) for the various QoL domains physical functioning (50.97), anxiety
(52.03), depression (47.47), fatigue (51.15), ability to participate in social
roles and activities (54.44), sleep disturbance (59.85), pain interference
(51.27), global physical health (GPH) (49.34) and global mental health (GMH)
(50.69). Mean pain intensity rating was 4.23. The mean SOC-29 was 148.34. The
most important covariates to changes in SOC were: GPH, depression, anxiety age,
fatigue and sleep disturbance. Partial dependence plots revealed that increasing 
GPH, GMH and age of patient predict increasing SOC. A high SOC was predicted in
the presence of low GPH given a high GMH scoring.
CONCLUSIONS: The mental health QoL domains had a stronger predictability for SOC 
than physical health domains.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctim.2019.102231 
PMID: 31987243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
received funding for this study from the International Chiropractic Pediatric
Association.


459. Psychol Aging. 2020 Feb;35(1):20-27. doi: 10.1037/pag0000380.

A comparison of primary and secondary caregivers of persons with dementia.

Gonçalves-Pereira M(1), Zarit SH(2), Cardoso AM(1), Alves da Silva J(3), Papoila 
AL(4), Mateos R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Chronic Diseases Research Centre, Nova Medical School/Faculdade de Ciencias
Medicas, Universidade Nova de Lisboa.
(2)Department of Human Development and Family Studies, Penn State University.
(3)Nova Medical School/Faculdade de Ciencias Medicas, Universidade Nova de
Lisboa.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Informatics, Nova Medical School/Faculdade de 
Ciencias Medicas, Universidade Nova de Lisboa.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Psychogeriatric Unit, Complejo Hospitalario
Universitario de Santiago, University of Santiago de Compostela.

Having 2 or more relatives involved in the informal care of people with dementia 
is frequent worldwide. There are, however, few comparisons of primary and
secondary caregivers and even fewer of those who are caring for the same person. 
Our study aimed to contrast these 2 experiences of caregiving. We compared 2
related samples of 61 primary and 61 secondary family caregivers of the same
persons with dementia in a nonrandomized cross-sectional study. Caregivers' main 
outcome assessments were the Zarit Burden Interview (for subjective burden), the 
General Health Questionnaire (for psychological distress), and the Positive
Aspects of Caregiving scale. We controlled for caregiver variables (e.g.,
demographics, caregiving arrangements, social support, sense of coherence) and
the neuropsychiatric symptoms of dementia. Subjective burden was higher in
primary than secondary caregivers (p = .013), but positive aspects of caregiving 
did not differ (p = .150). Psychological distress was high at clinically relevant
levels in primary and secondary caregivers, without statistically significant
differences between groups (p = .456). The findings demonstrate that
notwithstanding the difficulties faced by primary caregivers, secondary
caregivers may also experience clinically significant distress. Therefore, their 
needs for assistance and support should be addressed more systematically. These
findings call for systemic family-focused interventions in dementia that address 
the support each person provides or might provide, as well as the psychological
distress each person may feel. (PsycINFO Database Record (c) 2020 APA, all rights
reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/pag0000380 
PMID: 31985246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Psychosom Res. 2020 Mar;130:109936. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2020.109936. Epub
2020 Jan 16.

Does the separation from marital partners of Syrian refugees with a residence
permit in Germany have an impact on their quality of life?

Georgiadou E(1), Schmitt GM(2), Erim Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, Friedrich-Alexander
University Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany; Department of Psychiatry
and Psychotherapy, Paracelsus Medical University Nuremberg, Germany.
(2)Erlangen City Council, Employment Agency, Erlangen, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, Friedrich-Alexander
University Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany. Electronic address:
yesim.erim@uk-erlangen.de.

OBJECTIVE: Around 700,000 Syrian refugees live in Germany, most of them having
come alone since 2015 as asylum seekers and waiting in Germany for family
reunification. This study focused on separation from marital partner and its
impact on quality of life among Syrian refugees with a residence permit.
METHODS: For the present investigation, we included only married participants of 
a larger registry-based study. Therefore, we analyzed 119 participants; 93 of
them were married, and their partner accompanied them in Germany at the time of
the investigation (partner+), while a further 26 were married but separated from 
their partner (partner-). The respondents were investigated for mental stress,
quality of life and protective factors.
RESULTS: The partner- group reported significantly lower quality of life in the
domains of psychological and social health in comparison to the partner+ group.
Higher general quality of life was associated with higher social support, higher 
sense of coherence and fewer symptoms of depression. Predictors for a higher
quality of life were male gender, fewer symptoms of depression, a higher sense of
coherence, higher perceived social support and living together with the marital
partner.
CONCLUSION: Family separation of Syrian refugees with a residence permit in
Germany can have an impact on their quality of life. Longitudinal studies are
needed to confirm our results and determine the long-term effects of family
separation.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2020.109936 
PMID: 31972478  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
have no competing interests to report.


461. Magn Reson Med. 2020 Aug;84(2):866-872. doi: 10.1002/mrm.28154. Epub 2020 Jan 22.

Controlled aliasing for improved parallel imaging with a 3D spiral staircase
trajectory.

Anderson AG 3rd(1), Wang D(2), Pipe JG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Philips Healthcare, Gainesville, Florida.
(2)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

PURPOSE: To introduce a modified 3D stack-of-spirals trajectory and efficient
SENSE reconstruction for improved through-plane undersampling, while maintaining 
SNR efficiency and other benefits of spiral acquisitions.
METHODS: A novel spiral staircase trajectory is introduced. This trajectory is a 
modified stack of spirals, in which spiral arms are distributed between
partitions along kz . The trajectory maintains the efficient separable
reconstruction with a Cartesian fast Fourier transform along the kz direction,
followed by a 2D slice-by-slice gridding reconstruction. An additional
intermediate step introduces a phase correction to collapse the spiral arms into 
the prescribed slice planes. For data undersampled through plane, this produces
aliasing with reduced coherence, controlled by the arm-ordering. Undersampled
data can then be reconstructed with reduced g-factor using a conjugate
gradient-based iterative SENSE algorithm.
RESULTS: The trajectory significantly improves g-factor for through-plane
accelerated acquisitions. Improvement manifests through both reduced overall
g-factor and reduced structure in the g-factor maps. In the presented
experiments, the mean g-factor decreased from 1.26 to 0.93 and the maximum
g-factor decreased from 3.89 to 1.15 for R = 2 spiral staircase when compared
with stack of spirals, and the mean g-factor decreased from 2.51 to 0.94 and the 
maximum g-factor decreased from 8.26 to 1.35 for R = 3 spiral staircase when
compared with stack of spirals.
CONCLUSION: The novel spiral staircase trajectory offers improved aliasing
characteristics for through-plane parallel imaging acceleration in 3D spiral
acquisitions.

© 2020 International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine.

DOI: 10.1002/mrm.28154 
PMID: 31967342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Rev Saude Publica. 2020 Jan 20;54:07. doi: 10.11606/s1518-8787.2020054001648.
eCollection 2020.

Impact of Seniors Centers on oral health-related quality of life of older adults.

Machado Luz FW(1), Silva AER(2), Perroni AP(1), Goettems ML(2), Boscato N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal de Pelotas. Faculdade de Odontologia. Programa de
Pós-Graduação em Odontologia. Pelotas, RS, Brasil.
(2)Universidade Federal de Pelotas. Programa de Pós-Graduação em Odontologia.
Departamento de Odontologia Social e Preventiva. Pelotas, RS, Brasil.
(3)Universidade Federal de Pelotas. Programa de Pós-Graduação em Odontologia.
Departamento de Odontologia Restauradora. Pelotas, RS, Brasil.

OBJECTIVE: This study evaluated the oral health-related quality of life (OHRQoL) 
of older adults participating or not in Seniors Centers (SC).
METHODS: Two independent samples were compared: older adults who participate in
SC (n = 124) and older adults who visited Primary Healthcare Centers (PHC) and do
not participate in SC (n = 164). The data collected consisted of sociodemographic
(sex, age, educational level, marital status, family income) and psychosocial
characteristics-Sense of Coherence (SOC), anxiety and depression using HADS,
happiness-, and oral clinical evaluation-use and need of dental prosthesis and
decayed (D), missing (M), or filled (F) teeth. The resulting OHRQoL was evaluated
using the Oral Health Impact Profile (OHIP-14). The Mann-Whitney test was used to
assess the associations between the independent variables and the OHIP-14.
Poisson regression models were also used in the analyses (α=0.05).
RESULTS: In the PHC, of the 270 individuals invited to participate in the study, 
164 (60.7%) were interviewed and clinically examined; while in the SC, of the 166
individuals invited to participate in the study, 124 (74.7%) were interviewed and
clinically examined. After adjustments for sociodemographic, psychosocial and
clinical factors, we found that the impact on OHRQoL was 2.8 times higher (95%CI 
2.0-4.2) for older adults who did not participate in SC.
CONCLUSION: Older adults who participated in SC showed better perception on
OHRQoL, independently of sociodemographic, psychosocial and clinical factors.

DOI: 10.11606/s1518-8787.2020054001648 
PMCID: PMC6961966
PMID: 31967276  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Clin Rehabil. 2020 Mar;34(3):404-415. doi: 10.1177/0269215519900533. Epub 2020
Jan 22.

Multiple psychological factors predict pain and disability among
community-dwelling knee osteoarthritis patients: a five-year prospective study.

Helminen EE(1), Arokoski JP(2), Selander TA(3), Sinikallio SH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Mental Health and Substance Abuse, Social Services and Health Care, City of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Helsinki University
Hospital and University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Science Service Center, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.
(4)School of Educational Sciences and Psychology, University of Eastern Finland, 
Kuopio, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: To identify predictors of long-term pain and disability in knee
osteoarthritis.
DESIGN: A longitudinal cohort study of five years.
SETTING: Primary care providers.
SUBJECTS: In all, 108 patients (mean age = 63.6 years, standard deviation (SD) = 
7.2 years) with knee pain (⩾40 mm on a 100 mm visual analogue scale in the
Western Ontario and McMaster Universities (WOMAC) Osteoarthritis Index pain
scale) and radiographic grading (Kellgren-Lawrence: 2-4) of knee osteoarthritis
who participated in a randomized controlled trial.
MAIN MEASURES: Disease-specific pain and functioning were assessed using the
corresponding WOMAC subscales. Generic functioning was assessed by the RAND-36
subscales for function and physical and mental component summary scores. Possible
baseline predictors for these outcomes were (1) demographic and disease-related
variables and (2) psychological variables of mood (anxiety, depression),
pain-related cognitions (pain self-efficacy, pain catastrophizing,
kinesiophobia), and positive resource factors (life satisfaction, sense of
coherence).
RESULTS: Multivariate linear mixed model analyses revealed that minimal anxiety
at baseline predicted significantly better results for pain (WOMAC, P = 0.019)
and function (WOMAC, P = 0.001, RAND-36 function P = 0.001). High pain
self-efficacy predicted significantly better scores in RAND-36 function (P =
0.006), physical (P = 0.004) and mental (P = 0.001) component summaries. Pain
catastrophizing predicted higher pain (P = 0.015), whereas fear of movement
predicted poorer functioning in RAND-36 physical (P = 0.016) and mental (P =
0.009) component summaries. Those satisfied with life reported higher scores in
RAND-36 function (P = 0.002) and mental component summary (P = 0.041). A low
number of comorbidities predicted significantly better results in pain (WOMAC P =
0.019) and function (WOMAC P = 0.033, RAND-36 P = 0.009).
CONCLUSION: Anxiety, pain-related cognitions, and psychological resources predict
symptoms in knee osteoarthritis in the long term.

DOI: 10.1177/0269215519900533 
PMID: 31965830  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Integr Cancer Ther. 2020 Jan-Dec;19:1534735419890682. doi:
10.1177/1534735419890682.

Long-Term Effect of a Nonrandomized Psychosocial Mindfulness-Based Intervention
in Hispanic/Latina Breast Cancer Survivors.

Elimimian E(1), Elson L(1), Bilani N(1), Farrag SE(2), Dwivedi AK(3), Pasillas
R(3), Nahleh ZA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Maroone Cancer Center, Cleveland Clinic, Weston, FL, USA.
(2)SSM Health St Mary's Hospital, Saint Louis, MO, USA.
(3)Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, El Paso, TX, USA.

Background: There is a paucity of research on the long-term impact of
stress-reduction in Hispanic/Latina breast cancer (BC) survivors, a growing
minority. In this article, we assess the long-term efficacy of an 8-week training
program in mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) on quality of life (QoL) in 
Hispanic BC survivors. Methods: Hispanic BC survivors, within the first 5 years
of diagnosis, stages I to III BC, were recruited. Participants were enrolled in
bilingual, 8-week intensive group training in MBSR and were asked to practice a- 
home, daily. They were also provided with audio recordings and a book on
mindfulness practices. Patient-reported outcomes for QoL and distress were
evaluated at baseline, and every 3 months, for 24 months. Results: Thirty-three
self-identified Hispanic women with BC completed the MBSR program and were
followed at 24 months. Statistically significant reduction was noted for the
Generalized Anxiety Disorder measure (mean change -2.39, P=0.04); and Patient
Health Questionnaire (mean change -2.27, P=0.04), at 24 months, compared with
baseline. Improvement was noted in the Short-Form 36 Health-related QoL Mental
Component Summary with an increase of 4.07 (95% confidence interval = 0.48-7.66, 
P=0.03). However, there was no significant change in the Physical Component
Summary. Conclusions: Hispanic BC survivors who participated in an 8-week
MBSR-based survivorship program reported persistent benefits with reduced
anxiety, depression, and improved mental health QoL over 24 months of follow-up. 
Stress reduction programs are beneficial and can be implemented as part of a
comprehensive survivorship care in BC patients.

DOI: 10.1177/1534735419890682 
PMCID: PMC6971966
PMID: 31957499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Psychiatr Pol. 2019 Oct 30;53(5):1021-1036. doi: 10.12740/PP/95091. Epub 2019 Oct
30.

Sense of coherence and hypertensive target organ damage.

[Article in English, Polish]

Popiołek L(1), Gawlik I(2), Siga O(3), Dzieża-Grudnik A(3), Moląg M(2), Rodziński
P(1), Grodzicki T(3), Walczewska J(3), Rutkowski K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Uniwersytet Jagielloński Collegium Medicum, Katedra Psychoterapii.
(2)Szpital Uniwersytecki w Krakowie.
(3)Uniwersytet Jagielloński Collegium Medicum, Katedra Chorób Wewnętrznych i
Gerontologii.

OBJECTIVES: This study was designed to compare the level of sense of coherence in
hypertensive patients with arterial stiffness or leftventricular hypertrophy and 
in hypertensive individuals without such health complications.
METHODS: The study group consisted of 93 participants. All of them were asked to 
undergo the following procedures: clinical assessment, echocardiography (to
diagnose hypertensive cardiac damage), pulse wave velocity measurement (to assess
vascular damage) and psychological testing (to measure their level of
comprehensibility, manageability, meaningfulness, and sense of coherence).
RESULTS: Patients with hypertensive vascular damage (high pulse wave velocity)
had higher levels of comprehensibility and sense of coherence than other
hypertensive subjects. At the same time, there were no significant differences in
the level of sense of coherence (and all of its dimensions) between individuals
with and people without hypertensive left ventricular hypertrophy.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of this study suggest, that the sense of coherence may 
not be strongly associated with good somatic health. They may also contribute to 
the discussion about diagnostic usefulness of the SOC-29 method as a single tool.
We believe that the level of sense of coherence should be taken into
consideration in further studies on the development of hypertensive TOD.

DOI: 10.12740/PP/95091 
PMID: 31955183  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Eur J Oncol Nurs. 2020 Feb;44:101714. doi: 10.1016/j.ejon.2019.101714. Epub 2019 
Dec 20.

Development and implementation strategies of a nurse-led symptom self-management 
program in outpatient cancer centres: The Symptom Navi© Programme.

Bana M(1), Ribi K(2), Kropf-Staub S(3), Näf E(4), Schramm MS(5), Zürcher-Florin
S(6), Peters S(7), Eicher M(8).

Author information: 
(1)University of Applied Sciences and Arts Western Switzerland HES-SO, School of 
Health Sciences, Route des Arsenaux 16a, CH-1700, Fribourg, Switzerland;
Institute of Higher Education and Research in Health Care IUFRS, Faculty of
Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne and Lausanne University Hospital,
SV-A Secteur Vennes, Route de la Corniche 10, CH-1010, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Electronic address: marika.bana@hefr.ch.
(2)Institute of Higher Education and Research in Health Care IUFRS, Faculty of
Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne and Lausanne University Hospital,
SV-A Secteur Vennes, Route de la Corniche 10, CH-1010, Lausanne, Switzerland;
International Breast Cancer Study Group (IBCSG), Effingerstrasse 40, CH-3008,
Bern, Switzerland. Electronic address: karin.ribi@ibcsg.org.
(3)Hospital Group Lindenhof, Lindenhof, Bremgartenstrasse 117, Postfach, CH-3001,
Bern, Switzerland. Electronic address: susanne.kropf@lindenhofgruppe.ch.
(4)Department of Practice Development in Nursing, Solothurner Spitäler,
Kantonsspital Olten, Baslerstrasse 150, CH-4601, Olten, Switzerland. Electronic
address: ernst.naef@spital.so.ch.
(5)University of Applied Sciences and Arts Western Switzerland HES-SO, School of 
Health Sciences, Route des Arsenaux 16a, CH-1700, Fribourg, Switzerland.
Electronic address: monique.sailer@medizentrum.ch.
(6)Hospital Group Lindenhof, Lindenhof, Bremgartenstrasse 117, Postfach, CH-3001,
Bern, Switzerland. Electronic address: sabin.zuercher@lindenhofgruppe.ch.
(7)Department of Oncology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV), Rue
du Bugnon 21, CH-1011, Lausanne, Switzerland. Electronic address:
solange.peters@chuv.ch.
(8)Institute of Higher Education and Research in Health Care IUFRS, Faculty of
Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne and Lausanne University Hospital,
SV-A Secteur Vennes, Route de la Corniche 10, CH-1010, Lausanne, Switzerland;
Department of Oncology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV), Rue du
Bugnon 21, CH-1011, Lausanne, Switzerland. Electronic address:
manuela.eicher@chuv.ch.

PURPOSE: The Symptom Navi© Programme (SN©P) is a structured nurse-led
intervention supporting symptom self-management in cancer patients. We describe
the development and evaluation of the intervention, implementation strategy, and 
the evaluation of nurse training for the Symptom Navi© Pilot Study.
METHODS: The intervention was developed using multiple methods (e.g. literature
synthesis, focus groups) to produce SN©P information leaflets (SN©Flyers in
French and German) and standardised training for nurses to deliver
semi-structured consultations. We evaluated the SN©P using online surveys, focus 
groups, interviews, and the Item-Content Validity Index (I-CVI). Nurse training
was evaluated in relation to content, acceptability, and confidence in
implementing the SN©P. We examined the association between scored on the
Work-related Sense of Coherence (Work-SoC) scale and nurses' confidence in
implementing the SN©P. Thematic analysis was used to analyse qualitative data.
Quantitative data was descriptively analysed and the Kendall Tau test was
employed for correlations.
RESULTS: Patients and health care professionals confirmed that SN©Flyers and
semi-structured consultations facilitated symptom self-management. Nurses
considered training content/format acceptable and appropriate and felt confident 
in implementing the SN©P. Overall Work-SoC scores were correlated with nurses'
confidence in implementing the SN©P (rπ = .47, p = .04).
CONCLUSIONS: Health care professionals and cancer patients perceived the SN©P as 
a useful support. Successful implementation of the SN©P depends on
centre-specific factors including time, resources and workflow.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRY: NCT03649984 and SNCTP000002381.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejon.2019.101714 
PMID: 31954227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Solange Peters 
has received education grants, provided consultation, attended advisory boards,
and/or provided lectures for: Abbvie, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Biocartis,
Boehringer-Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Clovis, Daiichi Sankyo, Debiopharm,
Eli Lilly, F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Foundation Medicine, Illumina, Janssen, Merck
Sharp and Dohme, Merck Serono, Merrimack, Novartis, Pharma Mar, Pfizer,
Regeneron, Sanofi, Seattle Genetics and Takeda, from whom she has received
honoraria. Manuela Eicher received education grants, provided consultation,
attended advisory boards, and/or provided lectures for: Vifor, Roche, and
Bristol-Myers Squibb. All other authors have no competing interests to declare.


467. Public Health. 2020 Apr;181:46-52. doi: 10.1016/j.puhe.2019.11.024. Epub 2020 Jan
13.

Strategies to improve continuity maintenance for people with dementia: a rapid
realist review.

Lim S(1), Song JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Nursing, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)College of Nursing, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: jasong@korea.ac.kr.

OBJECTIVES: People with life-limiting diseases such as dementia are living
longer. How to improve the quality of life of those living with dementia is an
important challenge for society. Continuity maintenance in older adulthood is a
psychosocial adaptation strategy by searching for preference and familiarity,
making a sense of connection, and creating coherence. Continuity maintenance is a
useful concept for effective dementia care, which could bring psychosocial
benefits. This review investigates effective ways of continuity maintenance for
people with dementia (PWD).
STUDY DESIGN: A rapid realist review (RRR) of a comprehensive range of databases 
was conducted.
METHODS: Realist review methodology provides an explanatory analysis of what
works for whom, in what circumstances, and is characterized by its focus on
strategies/interventions, contexts, mechanisms, and outcomes. A literature search
was conducted using four databases, and articles discussing potential
interventions to maintain continuity in PWD were included. Data were extracted on
key variables related to contextual factors, mechanisms, and outcomes.
RESULTS: Four key themes emerged: (1) maintaining personal identity, (2)
maintaining social identity, (3) keeping a familiar environment, and (4)
sustaining daily activities. It is hypothesized that these four factors combine
and interact to maintain continuity and ultimately lead to psychosocial benefits.
CONCLUSIONS: Maintenance of identity, environment, and activities is central to
continuity for PWD. The resulting model and program theories respond to the need 
for a coherent approach to continuity maintenance. Using the foundations created 
by this RRR, nursing homes may psychosocially improve PWD through maintaining
continuity.

Copyright © 2019 The Royal Society for Public Health. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.puhe.2019.11.024 
PMID: 31945645  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


468. PLoS One. 2020 Jan 16;15(1):e0227233. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0227233.
eCollection 2020.

Modeling the Theory of Planned Behaviour to predict adherence to preventive
dental visits in preschool children.

Elyasi M(1), Lai H(2), Major PW(1), Baker SR(3), Amin M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Orthodontic Graduate Program, School of Dentistry, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(2)School of Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Academic Unit of Oral Health, Dentistry and Society, University of Sheffield, 
Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(4)Division of Pediatric Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

OBJECTIVES: Dental caries is the most common chronic childhood disease that
occurs in a continuum and can be prevented by children and their parents'
adherence to recommended oral health behaviors. Theory-driven tools help
practitioners to identify the causes for poor adherence and develop effective
interventions. This study examined the Expanded Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPB)
Model by adding the concept of Sense of Coherence (SOC) to predict parental
adherence to preschooler's preventive dental visits.
METHODS: Data regarding socio-economic demographics were collected from parents
of children aged 2-6 years. Constructs of TPB including parental attitudes,
subjective norms (SN), Perceived Behavioural Control (PBC), and intention to
attend preventive dental visits for their preschoolers were collected by
questionnaire, alongside parents' sense of coherence (SOC). Dental attendance was
measured by asking if the child had a regular dental visit during the last year. 
Structural Equation Modeling Analysis (SEMA) was carried out to identify
significant direct and indirect (mediated) pathways in the extended TPB model.
RESULTS: Three hundred and seventy-eight mothers (mean age = 34.41 years, range
22-48) participated in the study. The mean age of children was 3.92 years, range:
2-6), and 75.9% had dental insurance. Results of the final model showed that
predisposing factors (child's birthplace and mother's birthplace) significantly
predicted enabling resources (family monthly income and child's dental insurance 
status); both predicted the TPB components (PBC, SN, and attitude). TPB
components, in turn, predicted behavioural intention. However, contrary to
expectation, intention did not significantly predict dental attendance in the
past 12 months. Parent's SOC significantly predicted TPB components and dental
attendance. Overall, 56% of the variance in dental attendance was explained by
the expanded TPB model.
CONCLUSIONS: The expanded TPB model explained a great deal of variance in
preschooler's dental attendance. These findings suggest that the expanded model
could be used as the framework for designing interventions or strategies to
enhance dental attendance among preschoolers; in particular, such strategies
should focus specifically on enhancing parental SOC including empowerment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0227233 
PMCID: PMC6964827
PMID: 31945098  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


469. PLoS One. 2020 Jan 15;15(1):e0227867. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0227867.
eCollection 2020.

Factors related to met needs for rehabilitation 6 years after stroke.

Ytterberg C(1)(2)(3), Kristensen HK(3)(4), Tistad M(1)(5), von Koch L(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, 
Huddinge, Sweden.
(2)Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, Sweden.
(3)Research Unit in Rehabilitation, Institute of Clinical Research, University of
Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(4)Health Sciences Research Centre, University College Lillebaelt, Odense,
Denmark.
(5)School of Education, Health and Social Studies, Dalarna University, Falun,
Sweden.

INTRODUCTION: Research on stroke rehabilitation mainly concerns the first year of
recovery, and there is a lack of knowledge regarding long-term rehabilitation
needs and associated factors.
AIM: The aim was to explore the perceived needs for rehabilitation services of
people six years after stroke and factors associated with having rehabilitation
services needs met.
METHODS: The study was a 6-year follow up of a prospective study on the
rehabilitation process after stroke. Data on perceived needs for rehabilitation, 
personal factors, disease specific factors, and patient-reported disability were 
collected through face-to-face interviews in the participants' homes. Logistic
regression models were created to explore associations between having
rehabilitation services needs met in 11 problem areas (dependent variable) and
the independent variables: involvement in decisions regarding care and treatment,
sex, age, sense of coherence, self-defined level of private financing, stroke
severity, frequency of social everyday activities, perceived impact of stroke,
and life satisfaction.
RESULTS: The 121 participants had a mean age of 63 years at stroke onset and 58% 
were men. In all problem areas the majority (53-88%) reported having needs met at
six years after stroke, however 47% reported unmet needs regarding fatigue and
45% regarding mobility. A lower perceived impact on participation was found to be
associated with having rehabilitation services needs met in seven problem areas: 
mobility, falls, pain, fatigue, concentration, memory, and sight. The strongest
association for having needs met was found for the independent variable,
involvement in care and treatment, within the three problem areas mobility,
falls, and speaking.
CONCLUSION: In a long-term perspective, there were several modifiable factors
associated with having rehabilitation services needs met. The most prominent were
perceived involvement in care and treatment, and perceived participation. These
factors had a stronger association with having rehabilitation services needs met 
than disease specific factors six years after stroke.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0227867 
PMCID: PMC6961904
PMID: 31940423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


470. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Jan 8;17(2). pii: E403. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17020403.

Validation of Psychosocial Measures Assessing American Indian Parental Beliefs
Related to Control over Their Children's Oral Health.

Wilson AR(1), Tiwari T(1), Thomas JF(2), Henderson WG(2), Braun PA(2)(3), Albino 
J(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Dental Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
13123 E. 16th Ave. B240, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(2)Adult and Child Consortium of Outcomes Research and Dissemination Science
University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus, 13199 E. Montview Blvd., Suite
300 F443, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(3)Colorado School of Public Health, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical
Campus, 13199 E. Montview, Blvd, Suite 300, W359-G, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To validate questionnaire items assessing American Indian (AI)
parental beliefs regarding control over their children's oral health within the
context of psychosocial measures and children's oral health status.
METHODS: Baseline questionnaire data were collected as part of a randomized
controlled trial (n = 1016) addressing early childhood caries. Participants were 
AI parents with preschool-age children in the Navajo Nation Head Start program.
Questionnaire items assessed parental oral health locus of control (OHLOC) and
agreement with beliefs indicating that they were in control of their children's
oral health (internal), the dentist was in control (external powerful others), or
children's oral health was a matter of chance (external chance). Exploratory
factor analysis was conducted, and convergent validity was assessed using linear 
regression.
RESULTS: Parents with more education (p < 0.0001) and income (p = 0.001) had
higher scores for internal OHLOC. Higher internal OHLOC scores were associated
with higher scores on knowledge (p < 0.0001), perceived seriousness and benefits 
(p < 0.0001), higher self-efficacy, importance, sense of coherence (p < 0.0001
for all), and lower scores for perceived barriers (p < 0.0001) and distress (p = 
0.01). Higher scores for both types of external OHLOC were associated with lower 
scores on knowledge (p < 0.0001), perceived seriousness (p < 0.0001), and higher 
scores on perceived susceptibility (p = 0.01 external chance; <0.0001 powerful
others) and barriers (<0.0001). Higher scores for external powerful others were
associated with lower scores for importance (p = 0.04) and sense of coherence (p 
= 0.03). Significant associations were not found for OHLOC beliefs and children's
oral health status.
CONCLUSIONS: Questionnaire items addressing OHLOC functioned in accordance with
the theoretical framework in AI participants.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17020403 
PMCID: PMC7014362
PMID: 31936256  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Health SA. 2019 Jul 18;24:1151. doi: 10.4102/hsag.v24i0.1151. eCollection 2019.

Sense of coherence in Chinese and German students.

Mayer CH(1), Louw L(1), von der Ohe H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Management, Rhodes University, Grahamstown, South Africa.
(2)Department of Industrial and Organisational Psychology, University of South
Africa, Pretoria, South Africa.

Background: Mental health and salutogenesis are important topics at universities 
in China and Germany where heightening stress levels in students can be observed.
Aim: The aim of this article is to determine the profile of the salutogenic
concept, sense of coherence (SOC), in Chinese and German students to provide new 
insights into SOC and mental health in Chinese and German students in higher
education institutions (HEIs).
Setting: The study was carried out at universities in China and Germany.
Method: A non-experimental, cross-sectional, survey-based research design and
convenience sampling was utilised to obtain the sample (n = 356). The sample was 
derived at a selected Chinese (n = 255) and a selected German university (n =
101). Data were gathered using the 7-point Likert SOC dimension scales based on
the Life-Orientation Questionnaire (LOQ) research instrument. The internal
consistency levels of the SOC sub-scales were of acceptable levels. Descriptive
and inferential statistics were used to analyse the data. Cronbach's alpha
coefficients were calculated to determine the reliability of the LOQ research
instrument. General linear modelling techniques.
Results: The results showed the Chinese students scored significantly lower in
all three SOC scales than the German students, with the largest practical
significant difference in the sub-score of meaningfulness. In general, female
Chinese and German students scored higher than their male counterparts. No
significant differences could be found between German female and male, and
Chinese female and male students.
Conclusion: Conclusions and recommendations for future research and HEI practice 
are provided.

© 2019. The Authors.

DOI: 10.4102/hsag.v24i0.1151 
PMCID: PMC6917389
PMID: 31934426 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no financial
or personal relationships that may have inappropriately influenced them in
writing this article.


472. Telemed J E Health. 2020 Sep;26(9):1167-1177. doi: 10.1089/tmj.2019.0135. Epub
2020 Jan 10.

Utilized or Underutilized: A Qualitative Analysis of Building Coherence During
Early Implementation of a Tele-Intensive Care Unit.

Van Tiem JM(1)(2), Friberg JE(1)(2), Wilson JR(2)(3), Fitzwater L(4), Blum
JM(5)(6), Panos RJ(4), Reisinger HS(1)(2)(7), Moeckli J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)VA Office of Rural Health (ORH), Veterans Rural Health Resource Center-Iowa
City, Iowa City VA Healthcare System, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(2)The Center for Access and Delivery Research and Evaluation (CADRE) at the Iowa
City VA Healthcare System, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(3)Department of Nursing, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City,
Iowa, USA.
(4)VISN 10/Cincinnati Tele-ICU System, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(5)Department of Anesthesiology, Atlanta VA Healthcare System, Atlanta, Georgia, 
USA.
(6)Department of Anesthesiology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA.
(7)The Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa Carver College of
Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.

Background: Generating, reading, or interpreting data is a component of
Telemedicine-Intensive Care Unit (Tele-ICU) utilization that has not been
explored in the literature. Introduction: Using the idea of "coherence," a
construct of Normalization Process Theory, we describe how intensive care unit
(ICU) and Tele-ICU staff made sense of their shared work and how they made use of
Tele-ICU together. Materials and Methods: We interviewed ICU and Tele-ICU staff
involved in the implementation of Tele-ICU during site visits to a Tele-ICU hub
and 3 ICUs, at preimplementation (43 interviews with 65 participants) and 6
months postimplementation (44 interviews with 67 participants). Data were
analyzed using deductive coding techniques and lexical searches. Results: In the 
early implementation of Tele-ICU, ICU and Tele-ICU staff lacked consensus about
how to share information and consequently how to make use of innovations in data 
tracking and interpretation offered by the Tele-ICU (e.g., acuity systems).
Attempts to collaborate and create opportunities for utilization were supported
by quality improvement (QI) initiatives. Discussion: Characterizing Tele-ICU
utilization as an element of a QI process limited how ICU staff understood
Tele-ICU as an innovation. It also did not promote an understanding of how the
Tele-ICU used data and may therefore attenuate the larger promise of Tele-ICU as 
a potential tool for leveraging big data in critical care. Conclusions: Shared
data practices lay the foundation for Tele-ICU program utilization but raise new 
questions about how the promise of big data can be operationalized for bedside
ICU staff.

DOI: 10.1089/tmj.2019.0135 
PMID: 31928388  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Front Psychol. 2019 Dec 13;10:2778. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02778. eCollection
2019.

Life Crafting as a Way to Find Purpose and Meaning in Life.

Schippers MC(1), Ziegler N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Technology and Operations Management, Rotterdam School of
Management, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Having a purpose in life is one of the most fundamental human needs. However, for
most people, finding their purpose in life is not obvious. Modern life has a way 
of distracting people from their true goals and many people find it hard to
define their purpose in life. Especially at younger ages, people are searching
for meaning in life, but this has been found to be unrelated to actually finding 
meaning. Oftentimes, people experience pressure to have a "perfect" life and show
the world how well they are doing, instead of following up on their deep-felt
values and passions. Consequently, people may need a more structured way of
finding meaning, e.g., via an intervention. In this paper, we discuss
evidence-based ways of finding purpose, via a process that we call "life
crafting." This process fits within positive psychology and the salutogenesis
framework - an approach focusing on factors that support human health and
well-being, instead of factors that cause disease. This process ideally starts
with an intervention that entails a combination of reflecting on one's values,
passions and goals, best possible self, goal attainment plans, and other positive
psychology intervention techniques. Important elements of such an intervention
are: (1) discovering values and passion, (2) reflecting on current and desired
competencies and habits, (3) reflecting on present and future social life, (4)
reflecting on a possible future career, (5) writing about the ideal future, (6)
writing down specific goal attainment and "if-then" plans, and (7) making public 
commitments to the goals set. Prior research has shown that personal goal setting
and goal attainment plans help people gain a direction or a sense of purpose in
life. Research findings from the field of positive psychology, such as
salutogenesis, implementation intentions, value congruence, broaden-and-build,
and goal-setting literature, can help in building a comprehensive evidence-based 
life-crafting intervention. This intervention can aid individuals to find a
purpose in life, while at the same time ensuring that they make concrete plans to
work toward this purpose. The idea is that life crafting enables individuals to
take control of their life in order to optimize performance and happiness.

Copyright © 2019 Schippers and Ziegler.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02778 
PMCID: PMC6923189
PMID: 31920827 


474. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2019 Dec 24;15:3519-3529. doi: 10.2147/NDT.S230278.
eCollection 2019.

Type C Personality and Depression Among Newly Diagnosed Breast Cancer Patients:
The Mediating Role of Sense of Coherence.

Wei M(1), Guo L(1), Zhu Y(1), Guo Y(2), Yv S(1), Namassevayam G(1), Xue W(3), Li 
J(4), Li L(4), Shen Z(4), Yv J(4), Zhu Z(3), Wang W(3), Liu Y(5), Zhao J(3), Chen
F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan Province, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan Province, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, Henan Province, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, Henan Province, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Nursing, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, Henan Province, People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Medical Administration, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan Province, People's Republic of China.

Purpose: This study aims to explore the mediating role of sense of coherence in
the relationship of type C personality and depression among newly diagnosed
breast cancer patients.
Methods: A descriptive and correlational survey was conducted in 600 breast
cancer patients aged ≥18 years from September 2018 to March 2019 in Zhengzhou,
China. The demographic questionnaire, Cancer Behavior Scale, Sense of Coherence
Scale and Hamilton Depression Scale were included in this study. Data analysis
was performed by correlation analysis, multiple linear regression analysis, and
structural equation modeling.
Results: The valid questionnaires were 575 (effective response rate: 95.8%). The 
score of sense of coherence was negatively correlated with type C personality and
depression (r = -0.41, P < 0.01; r = -0.58, P < 0.01); the score of type C
personality and depression were positively correlated (r = 0.51, P < 0.01). The
results of multiple linear regression analysis revealed that the effect of type C
personality on depression was partly mediated by sense of coherence, which was
confirmed by structural equation modeling. The mediation effect accounts for
45.2% (0.269/0.594) of the total effect.
Conclusion: The results of this study revealed that sense of coherence as a
partial mediating role is essential for reducing the influence of type C
personality on depression. Early and targeted psychological interventions on
sense of coherence are needed to alleviate the symptom of depression in newly
diagnosed breast cancer patients.

© 2019 Wei et al.

DOI: 10.2147/NDT.S230278 
PMCID: PMC6935278
PMID: 31920312 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.


475. J Med Food. 2020 Aug;23(8):834-840. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2019.0241. Epub 2020 Jan 8.

Curcumin-Based Treatment for Macular Edema from Uncommon Etiologies: Efficacy and
Safety Assessment.

Ferrara M(1), Allegrini D(1), Sorrentino T(2), Sborgia G(3), Parmeggiani F(4),
Borgia A(2), Romano MR(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Eye Center, Humanitas, Bergamo, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Milano, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical Science, Neuroscience and Sense Organs, Eye Clinic,
University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
(4)Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, University of
Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

The aim of this study was to investigate the efficacy and safety of curcumin
formulation with a polyvinylpyrrolidone-hydrophilic carrier (CHC*;
Diabec®-AlfaIntes, Italy) for the treatment of macular edema (ME) from uncommon
etiologies. We conducted retrospective interventional case series, reviewing the 
medical records of patients referred to the Eye Center, Humanitas Hospital,
Bergamo due to persistent ME related to uncommon causes and treated by oral
administration of CHC. The main outcomes assessed were best-corrected visual
acuity (BCVA), central macular thickness (CMT), and the presence of intraretinal 
and/or subretinal fluid (SRF). Only patients with a minimum follow-up (f/u) of 6 
months were included. The occurrence of any adverse effect was registered.
Thirty-one eyes of 30 patients were included, with a mean f/u of 8.32 ± 1.77
months. Of them, 9 patients (10 eyes) were affected by postoperative ME and 21 by
chronic central serous chorioretinopathy. Median BCVA significantly improved
after treatment, changing from 0.3 [0.16-0.5] to 0.1 [0-0.3] logarithm of the
minimum angle of resolution (P < .001). Also CMT was significantly improved, as
it decreased from 400 [364-438] μm before treatment to 280 [242-307] μm at the
last f/u visit (P < .001). The complete absorption of intraretinal/SRF was
detected in 23 of 31 eyes (74%) at the final f/u. No adverse effects were
registered. In conclusion, treatment with CHC was effective and safe for eyes
affected by ME of various uncommon etiologies, resulting in significant
improvement of both functional and anatomical outcomes, with the complete
resolution of the edema in the majority of cases (74%).

DOI: 10.1089/jmf.2019.0241 
PMID: 31913752  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Support Care Cancer. 2020 Sep;28(9):4275-4283. doi: 10.1007/s00520-019-05273-3.
Epub 2020 Jan 3.

The haematopoietic stem cell transplant survivors' sense of coherence about their
experiences: a qualitative study.

Sharin UBM(1), Hwang CCJ(2), Ang WHD(3), Lopez V(4).

Author information: 
(1)Alice Lee Centre for Nursing Studies, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Nursing Department, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Alice Lee Centre for Nursing Studies, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(4)School of Nursing, Hubei University of Medicine, 30 South Remin Road, Shiyan, 
442000, Hubei Province, China. lpz_violeta@yahoo.com.

PURPOSE: To explore the experiences of haematopoietic stem cell transplant
survivors attending the long-term follow-up unit.
METHODS: A descriptive qualitative study of eight post-haematopoietic stem cell
transplant survivors which were interviewed guided by the sense of coherence
framework. Thematic analysis was used to extract meaningful explication of the
survivors' experiences.
RESULTS: The post-haematopoietic stem cell transplant survivors interviewed were 
five females and three males with age ranging from 27 to 67 years and had the
stem cell transplant between 4 and 20 years. Three main themes emerged from the
data including (1) comprehending the experience, (2) acknowledging the
meaningfulness of the experience and (3) managing threats to a new life after the
transplant. The experiences of post-haematopoietic stem cell transplant survivors
were initially difficult but they were able to make re-adjustments to their new
life by reconciling with their new identity, refocusing on meaningful activities,
strengthening their resilience and navigating the healthcare system.
CONCLUSION: In spite of the difficulties faced by the survivors, they were able
to face the challenges and made adjustment in a positive light by focusing on the
valuable aspects of their experiences. Health care practitioners need to
continually support them throughout their survivorship journey no matter how long
it takes. Any long-term follow-up unit is a step in the right direction to meet
the complex needs of the survivors by integrating and adapting clinical
guidelines into routine oncologic and transplant care so that survivors are not
lost in transition following treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s00520-019-05273-3 
PMID: 31900616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Qual Life Res. 2020 May;29(5):1281-1290. doi: 10.1007/s11136-019-02404-5. Epub
2020 Jan 2.

Exploration of symptom experience in kidney transplant recipients based on
symptoms experience model.

Wang H(1), Du C(1), Liu H(2), Zhang S(1), Wu S(1), Fu Y(3), Zhao J(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Intersection of
Yangguang South Street and Baiyang East Road, Fang Shan District, Beijing,
102488, China.
(2)School of Nursing, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Intersection of
Yangguang South Street and Baiyang East Road, Fang Shan District, Beijing,
102488, China. hongxia_t@163.com.
(3)Organ Transplant Centre, Tianjin First Central Hospital, Tianjin, China.

PURPOSE: Kidney transplant recipients suffer from a variety of symptoms, and
symptom management is crucial in improving their quality of life (QOL).
Accordingly, this study aims to identify the symptoms experienced by kidney
transplant recipients and examine the relationship amongst antecedents, symptom
experience and QOL of recipients in China.
METHODS: A total of 300 kidney transplant recipients were investigated in one of 
the most first-rate hospitals in China by asking them to fill out a self-designed
general questionnaire, the Symptom Experience Scale, the Sense of Coherence Scale
(Chinese version), the Revised Life Orientation Test (Chinese version) and the
36-item Short Form Health Survey (Chinese version).
RESULTS: Kidney transplant recipients experienced multiple symptoms that were
frequent, severe and bothersome. The final model showed significant consistency
with the data. In the QOL model, post-transplant time, complications,
immunosuppressive agents and sense of coherence explained 30.7% of the variance
of symptom experience. Moreover, habitual residence, economic burden,
post-transplant time, kidney function, optimism and symptom experience accounted 
for 70.6% of the variance on QOL.
CONCLUSIONS: We can explain the relationship between antecedents, symptom
experience and QOL amongst Chinese kidney transplant recipients by using Symptoms
Experience Model. Clinicians and caregivers can manage the recipient's symptoms
during follow-up from psychological, physical and medication management
perspectives. Improving sense of coherence, maintaining optimism and managing
symptoms are essential for enhancing QOL.

DOI: 10.1007/s11136-019-02404-5 
PMID: 31898113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Acoust Soc Am. 2019 Dec;146(6):4472. doi: 10.1121/1.5140190.

On the modelling of wavepacket scattering noise with coherence effects.

da Silva FD(1), Jordan P(2), Cavalieri AVG(3).

Author information: 
(1)TEG Thermofluids Engineering Group, Federal University of Santa Catarina,
Joinville-Santa Catarina, 89219-600, Brazil.
(2)PPRIME Institute, CNRS-ENSMA-University of Poitiers, Poitiers, 86036, France.
(3)Instituto Tecnológico de Aeronáutica, São José dos Campos, 12228-900, Brazil.

An investigation of a wavepacket model for free-jet and jet-surface interaction
noise was conducted. The source term for the axisymmetric mode was extracted from
a Mach 0.9 jet large eddy simulation and employed to adjust the parameters of a
simple source model. Streamwise coherence decay, in particular, was considered.
The source model was propagated with both the free-field and tailored Green's
function for a semi-infinite flat plate positioned at a distance of r/D = 1 from 
the jet axis. Significant deviations were observed in the prediction of the
low-angle directivity of the isolated jet as well as in the reproduction of the
characteristics of the source field. However, the effects of trailing edge noise 
were well reproduced. The installed jet case, at the region dominated by
trailing-edge scattering, showed very little sensitivity to the coherence decay, 
a crucial feature in the isolated jet case. In this sense, the modelling of the
installed-jet case proved to be much simpler.

DOI: 10.1121/1.5140190 
PMID: 31893722 


479. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019 Dec 27;17(1). pii: E219. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17010219.

Temperament and Sense of Coherence: Emotional Intelligence as a Mediator.

Szcześniak M(1), Strochalska K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychology, University of Szczecin, 71-017 Szczecin, Poland.

Sense of coherence (SOC) reflects an individual's capacity and available
resources to deal with stressful situations. For some time now studies have
revealed that people differ in their experience of SOC; yet, very little is known
about how and through which mechanisms a high level of SOC is formed. In order to
increase our understanding about the paths to a high SOC in the stage of
adulthood, we focused on exploring the role both of temperament, as it has been
confirmed as a potential component in the development of more complex traits that
emerge later in life, and of emotional intelligence (EI) as it has been found to 
increase SOC. The sample consisted of 173 participants between 18 and 49. We used
the Temperament Evaluation of Memphis, Pisa and San Diego Autoquestionnaire
(TEMPS-A), Orientation to Life Questionnaire (OLQ), and Emotional Intelligence
Questionnaire (INTE). Results showed a negative correlation between the
depressive, cyclothymic, irritable, and anxious dimensions of temperament and
SOC, and EI. There was also a positive correlation between hyperthymic
temperament and SOC, and EI. EI correlated positively with a general sense of
coherence and its three dimensions. The PROCESS macro for SPSS showed that
emotional intelligence mediates the relationship between depressive, cyclothymic,
hyperthymic, irritable and anxious temperament, comprehensibility, manageability,
meaningfulness, and global orientation to life. On the basis of the obtained
outcomes, it can be stated that emotional intelligence mediates the relationship 
between dimensions of temperament and dimensions of SOC.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17010219 
PMCID: PMC6981951
PMID: 31892262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


480. Scand J Psychol. 2020 Jun;61(3):369-379. doi: 10.1111/sjop.12602. Epub 2019 Dec
27.

Psychometric properties and validation of the Swedish Five Facet Mindfulness
Questionnaire in a clinical and non-clinical sample among meditators and
non-meditators.

Lilja JL(1)(2), Falkenström F(3), Zelleroth C(4), Jacobson E(1), Risberg S(5),
Nissling L(1)(2), Weineland S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)R&D Primary Health Care, Västra Götaland, Sweden.
(3)Department of Behavioral Sciences and Learning, Linköping University, Sweden.
(4)Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)Bäckefors, Sweden.

Over a period of 15 years several attempts to conceptualize mindfulness have been
presented and revised, but there is still no clear or agreed-upon definition. The
use of mindfulness-based interventions has increased in clinical and research
settings the last couple of years, including in Sweden. As a clinician it is
crucial to know if a treatment works through the theoretically postulated
mechanisms of change. Mindfulness is a concept that is difficult to measure. The 
overall aim of the current project was to examine the psychometric properties of 
the Swedish version of the Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire (FFMQ_SWE) using 
three different studies. To test the construct validity of the FFMQ_SWE a
hierarchal confirmatory factor analysis was performed in a meditating
non-clinical sample, to examine if all the five facets would load on an overall
mindfulness construct. Psychometric properties of the instrument were examined in
a non-clinical and a clinical sample, and discriminative relationships with other
variables were analysed. The convergent validity was examined by analysing the
correlations between FFMQ_SWE and Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, Sense of
Coherence and Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale. Test-retest reliability
was tested by distributing FFMQ_SWE at two occasions. The hierarchal confirmatory
factor analysis showed good fit in a population of meditators. The FFMQ_SWE
showed good convergent validity and test-retest reliability in both clinical and 
non-clinical populations. In sum, the Swedish version of the FFMQ showed good
psychometric properties and can be a useful instrument as an evaluation of
treatment effects in both health care settings and research settings.

© 2019 Region Västra Götaland. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology published by
Scandinavian Psychological Associations and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/sjop.12602 
PMCID: PMC7318620
PMID: 31883273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Int J Qual Stud Health Well-being. 2020 Dec;15(1):1703884. doi:
10.1080/17482631.2019.1703884.

"Finally, I belong somewhere I can be proud of" - Experiences of being a
Clubhouse member in Norway.

Fekete OR(1), Langeland E(1), Larsen TMB(2), Kinn LG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Caring Sciences, Faculty of Health and Social
Sciences, Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, Bergen, Norway.
(2)Department of Health Promotion and Development Faculty of Psychology,
University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Welfare and Participation, Faculty of Health and Social
Sciences, Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, Bergen, Norway.

Purpose: The number of psychosocial Clubhouses is growing rapidly in Norway.
However, more knowledge is needed about the subjective experience of Clubhouse
members in terms of their recuperation processes and experiences in the Clubhouse
context. Therefore, this qualitative study explored what it is like to be a
Clubhouse member in Norway, and further discuss it in light of the theory of
Salutogenesis on successful pathways to coping and well-being.Methods: Using a
hermeneutic-phenomenological approach, the present study included in-depth,
semi-structured individual interviews with 18 Clubhouse members from three
accredited Norwegian Clubhouses. Analysis was conducted using systematic text
condensation.Results: Three main themes emerged from the analysis: "Finally, I
belong somewhere I can be proud of," "I feel more like an ordinary citizen, just 
different," and "I feel somewhat equal to others." Overall, the participants
experienced improved mental and social well-being owing to their membership of a 
Clubhouse.Conclusions: Our findings correspond with previous international
research. Owing to the positive effect participation in the Clubhouse seem to
have on members' motivation, Salutogenesis might help explain helpful processes
within the model. Moreover, the model might be a relevant example for policy and 
service development in mental health care and the labour market.

DOI: 10.1080/17482631.2019.1703884 
PMCID: PMC6968664
PMID: 31877109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


482. SSM Popul Health. 2019 Nov 27;10:100519. doi: 10.1016/j.ssmph.2019.100519.
eCollection 2020 Apr.

Informing theoretical development of salutogenic, asset-based health improvement 
to reduce syndemics among gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men:
Empirical evidence from secondary analysis of multi-national, online
cross-sectional surveys.

McDaid LM(1), Flowers P(1), Ferlatte O(2)(3), McAloney-Kocaman K(4), Gilbert
M(3)(5), Frankis J(6).

Author information: 
(1)MRC/CSO Social and Public Health Sciences Unit, University of Glasgow, 200
Renfield Street, Glasgow, G2 3QB, UK.
(2)Department of Social and Preventative Medicine, School of Public Health,
University of Montreal, 7101 Avenue du Parc (3rd Floor), Montreal, Quebec, H3N
1X9, Canada.
(3)Community Based Research Centre for Gay Men's Health, 1007-808 Nelson Street, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, V6Z 2H2, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychology, Glasgow Caledonian University, Cowcaddens Road,
Glasgow, G4 0BA, UK.
(5)School of Population and Public Health, University of British Columbia, 2206
East Mall, Vancouver, British Columbia, V6T 1Z3, Canada.
(6)Department of Health & Community Sciences, School of Health and Life Sciences,
Glasgow Caledonian University, Cowcaddens Road, Glasgow, G4 0BA, UK.

Globally, gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men (GBMSM) experience an
increased burden of poor sexual, mental and physical health. Syndemics theory
provides a framework to understand comorbidities and health among marginalised
populations. Syndemics theory attempts to account for the social, environmental, 
and other structural contexts that are driving and/or sustaining simultaneous
multiple negative health outcomes, but has been widely critiqued. In this paper, 
we conceptualise a new framework to counter syndemics by assessing the key
theoretical mechanisms by which pathogenic social context variables relate to
ill-health. Subsequently, we examine how salutogenic, assets-based approaches to 
health improvement could function among GBMSM across diverse national contexts.
Comparative quantitative secondary analysis of data on syndemics and community
assets are presented from two international, online, cross-sectional surveys of
GBMSM (SMMASH2 in Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland
and Sex Now in Canada). Negative sexual, mental and physical health outcomes were
clustered as hypothesised, providing evidence of the syndemic. We found that
syndemic ill-health was associated with social isolation and the experience of
stigma and discrimination, but this varied across national contexts. Moreover,
while some of our measures of community assets appeared to have a protective
effect on syndemic ill-health, others did not. These results present an important
step forward in our understanding of syndemic ill-health and provide new insights
into how to intervene to reduce it. They point to a theoretical mechanism through
which salutogenic approaches to health improvement could function and provide new
strategies for working with communities to understand the proposed processes of
change that are required. To move forward, we suggest conceptualising syndemics
within a complex adaptive systems model, which enables consideration of the
development, sustainment and resilience to syndemics both within individuals and 
at the population-level.

© 2019 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ssmph.2019.100519 
PMCID: PMC6911981
PMID: 31853476 

Conflict of interest statement: None.


483. J R Soc Interface. 2019 Dec;16(161):20190716. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2019.0716. Epub
2019 Dec 18.

Electromagnetic 0.1-100 kHz noise does not disrupt orientation in a
night-migrating songbird implying a spin coherence lifetime of less than 10 µs.

Kobylkov D(1)(2), Wynn J(3), Winklhofer M(1)(4), Chetverikova R(1)(2), Xu
J(1)(2), Hiscock H(5), Hore PJ(5), Mouritsen H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)AG 'Neurosensorik', University Oldenburg, 26111 Oldenburg, Germany.
(2)Research Centre for Neurosensory Sciences, University Oldenburg, 26111
Oldenburg, Germany.
(3)Oxford Navigation Group, Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK.
(4)AG 'Sensory Biology of Animals', University Oldenburg, 26111 Oldenburg,
Germany.
(5)Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory, Department of Chemistry,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

According to the currently prevailing theory, the magnetic compass sense in
night-migrating birds relies on a light-dependent radical-pair-based mechanism.
It has been shown that radio waves at megahertz frequencies disrupt magnetic
orientation in migratory birds, providing evidence for a quantum-mechanical
origin of the magnetic compass. Still, many crucial properties, e.g. the lifetime
of the proposed magnetically sensitive radical pair, remain unknown. The current 
study aims to estimate the spin coherence time of the radical pair, based on the 
behavioural responses of migratory birds to broadband electromagnetic fields
covering the frequency band 0.1-100 kHz. A finding that the birds were unable to 
use their magnetic compass under these conditions would imply surprisingly
long-lived (greater than 10 µs) spin coherence. However, we observed no effect of
0.1-100 kHz radiofrequency (RF) fields on the orientation of night-migratory
Eurasian blackcaps (Sylvia atricapilla). This suggests that the lifetime of the
spin coherence involved in magnetoreception is shorter than the period of the
highest frequency RF fields used in this experiment (i.e. approx. 10 µs). This
result, in combination with an earlier study showing that 20-450 kHz
electromagnetic fields disrupt magnetic compass orientation, suggests that the
spin coherence lifetime of the magnetically sensitive radical pair is in the
range 2-10 µs.

DOI: 10.1098/rsif.2019.0716 
PMCID: PMC6936046
PMID: 31847760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Nurs Manag. 2020 Apr;28(3):488-494. doi: 10.1111/jonm.12931.

Can social support enhance sense of coherence and perceived professional benefits
among Chinese registered nurses? A mediation model.

Zhan T(1)(2), Li H(3), Ding X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Nursing Department, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Hefei, China.
(2)Department of Surgical Nursing, College of Nursing, Anhui Medical University, 
Hefei, China.
(3)School of Nursing, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China.
(4)School of Nursing, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

AIM: To investigate the mediation role of social support in the relationship
between a sense of coherence and the perception of professional interests among
Chinese registered nurses.
BACKGROUND: Job burnout is become exceedingly common among registered nurses.
Perceived professional benefits and a sense of coherence can help regulate
nurses' negative emotions, reduce job burnout and turnover intention and increase
nurses' subjective well-being. However, little is known about the mediating
effect of social support on sense of coherence and perceived professional
benefits.
METHODS: From May to August 2017, data from 765 Chinese registered nurses were
collected from a 4-part questionnaire: general information, the sense of
coherence scale, social support rating scale and perceived professional benefits 
questionnaire. The independent factors of perceived professional benefits were
tested by multiple regression analysis. Structural equation model was used to
study the moderating effect of social support.
RESULTS: The mean perceived professional benefits score differed across
professional title (p < .001). Social support mediated 58% of the relationships
between a sense of coherence and perceived professional benefits.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, our study revealed that social support partially
mediates the relationship between a sense of coherence and perceived professional
benefits among Chinese registered nurses. Therefore, interventions based on
social support to enhance the sense of coherence and to strengthen nurses'
perceived professional benefits should be developed.
IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING MANAGEMENT: Nursing managers should create more learning
opportunities to improve nurses' abilities in clinical nursing and the social
support of nurses through many ways, so as to enhance nurses' sense of coherence 
and nurses' perceived professional benefits.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jonm.12931 
PMID: 31845402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Atheroscler Suppl. 2019 Dec;40:49-54. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosissup.2019.08.031.

Optical coherence tomography of retinal and choroidal layers in patients with
familial hypercholesterolaemia treated with lipoprotein apheresis.

Stefanutti C(1), Mesce D(1), Pacella F(2), Di Giacomo S(1), Turchetti P(3),
Forastiere M(2), Trovato Battagliola E(2), La Torre G(4), Smaldone G(2), Pacella 
E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Extracorporeal Therapeutic Techniques Unit, Lipid Clinic and Atherosclerosis
Prevention Centre Regional Centre for Rare Diseases, Immunohematology and
Transfusion Medicine, 'Umberto I' Hospital, Department of Molecular Medicine,
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Sense Organs, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Sapienza
University of Rome, Italy.
(3)National Institute for Health, Migration and Poverty (INMP/NIHMP), Rome,
Italy.
(4)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Pharmacy and
Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Sense Organs, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Sapienza
University of Rome, Italy. Electronic address: elena.pacella@uniroma1.it.

PURPOSE: Detect and quantify morpho-functional alterations of the retina and
choroid in patients affected by familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) treated with
lipoprotein apheresis (LA) using optic coherence tomography (OCT) and optic
coherence tomography-angriography (OCTA).
DESIGN: Observational study.
SUBJECTS: To be diagnosed: A group of 20 patients (40 eyes) being clinically and 
genetically diagnosed as FH and under treatment (FH-Group)", for at least 2
years, was compared to a control group of 20 healthy subjects (40 eyes), with a
normal lipid profile and no ocular disease (CT-Group).
METHODS: Participants were studied with the slit lamp, binocular indirect
fundoscopy, OCT and OCTA.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Best corrected visual acuity (BVCA), spherical equivalent 
(SE), intraocular pressure (IOP), central macular thickness (CMT), choroidal
thickness (CHT), retinal nerve fiber layer in four quadrants (RNFL
(Superior = Sup; Inferior = Inf; Nasal = Nas Temporal = Temp), and the mean value
across the four quadrants (RNFL G), foveal avascular zone (FAZ) and vascular
density (VD).
RESULTS: FH subjects had smaller RNFL superiorly (108 ± 19,38 μm
OD/111 ± 16,56 μm OS FH-Group vs 127 ± 7,42 μm OD/129 ± 14,64 μm OS CT-Group;
P < 0,001 for both OD and OS) and inferiorly (108 ± 23,58 μm OD/115 ± 17,33 μm OS
FH-Group vs 128 ± 18,15 μm OD/133 ± 17,38 μm OS CT-Group; P = 0,002 OD; P = 0,001
OS). G RNFL was consequently smaller (93 ± 12,94 μm OD/94 ± 10,49 μm OS FH-Group 
vs 101 ± 9,01 μm OD/101 ± 10,20 μm OS CT-Group; P = 0,03 OD; P = 0,02 OS). FH
subjects had a larger FAZ (0,31 ± 0,08 mm2 OD/0,33 ± 0,10 mm2 in OS FH-Group vs
0,21 ± 0,05 mm2 OD/0,21 ± 0,07 mm2 OS CT-Group; P < 0,001 OD; P = 0,002 OS).
CONCLUSIONS: Early signs of retinal vessel damage in FH patients can be detected 
and quantified with OCT and OCTA.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosissup.2019.08.031 
PMID: 31818450  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Multidiscip Healthc. 2019 Nov 11;12:903-915. doi: 10.2147/JMDH.S220656.
eCollection 2019.

Patients' Perceptions Of The Quality Of Palliative Care And Satisfaction - A
Cluster Analysis.

Sandsdalen T(1), Wilde-Larsson B(1)(2), Grøndahl VA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Social and Health Sciences, Department of Health and Nursing
Sciences, Inland Norway University of Applied Sciences, Elverum, Norway.
(2)Faculty of Health, Science and Technology, Department of Health Science,
Discipline of Nursing Science, Karlstad University, Karlstad, Sweden.
(3)Faculty of Health and Welfare Sciences, Østfold University College, Halden,
Norway.

Purpose: Palliative care services are multidisciplinary, and the quality needs to
be evaluated from the patients' perspectives. The aim was to explore the patient 
profiles in palliative care with respect to patients' perception of the quality
of palliative care received and patient satisfaction, and to describe and compare
person-related and organization-related conditions that characterize the patient 
profiles.
Patients and methods: A cross-sectional study, including 140 patients from four
different multidisciplinary palliative care contexts in Norway, was conducted in 
2014. The Quality from the Patient's Perspective questionnaire for Palliative
Care, which is based upon a person-centered theoretical model, was used.
Satisfaction was measured by the Emotional Stress Reaction questionnaire. Person-
and organization-related conditions were measured. Hierarchical cluster analysis,
ANOVA, Pearson Chi-Square Test and ANCOVA were used.
Results: Three unique patient clusters with different patterns of perceptions of 
quality of care and satisfaction were identified; Cluster 1 (41%) had the best
perception of care quality and were more satisfied, Cluster 2 (34%) had better
perceptions of care quality and were most satisfied and Cluster 3 (25%) had worst
perceptions of care quality and were less satisfied. The clusters were
characterized by person-related conditions (eg, patients' sense of coherence and 
perceptions of subjective importance of the quality) as well as
organization-related conditions (eg, physicians' competence and type of care
services).
Conclusion: The results can be used by multidisciplinary healthcare personnel to 
tailor quality work and improve person-centered care in palliative care contexts.
Improvement initiatives should focus on implementing a person-centered approach, 
increasing the palliative care competence of the personnel and facilitate
specialized palliative care services in the homecare context.

© 2019 Sandsdalen et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JMDH.S220656 
PMCID: PMC6857653
PMID: 31806988 

Conflict of interest statement: The data used was collected with financial
support from Inland Norway University of Applied Sciences and partly from
Lovisenberg Diaconal Hospital. The authors report no conflicts on interest in
this work.


487. Biomedicines. 2019 Nov 30;7(4). pii: E94. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines7040094.

Stem Cell Surgery and Growth Factors in Retinitis Pigmentosa Patients: Pilot
Study after Literature Review.

Limoli PG(1), Vingolo EM(2), Limoli C(1), Nebbioso M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Low Vision Research Centre of Milan, p.zza Sempione 3, 20145 Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Sense Organs, Faculty of Medicine and Odontology, Sapienza
University of Rome, p.le A. Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy.

To evaluate whether grafting of autologous mesenchymal cells, adipose-derived
stem cells, and platelet-rich plasma into the supracoroideal space by surgical
treatment with the Limoli retinal restoration technique (LRRT) can exert a
beneficial effect in retinitis pigmentosa (RP) patients. Twenty-one eyes
underwent surgery and were divided based on retinal foveal thickness (FT) ≤ 190
or > 190 µm into group A-FT and group B-FT, respectively. The specific LRRT triad
was grafted in a deep scleral pocket above the choroid of each eye. At 6-month
follow-up, group B showed a non-significant improvement in residual close-up
visus and sensitivity at microperimetry compared to group A. After an in-depth
review of molecular biology studies concerning degenerative phenomena underlying 
the etiopathogenesis of retinitis pigmentosa (RP), it was concluded that further 
research is needed on tapeto-retinal degenerations, both from a clinical and
molecular point of view, to obtain better functional results. In particular, it
is necessary to increase the number of patients, extend observation timeframes,
and treat subjects in the presence of still trophic retinal tissue to allow
adequate biochemical and functional catering.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines7040094 
PMCID: PMC6966474
PMID: 31801246 


488. Contemp Oncol (Pozn). 2019;23(3):157-163. doi: 10.5114/wo.2019.89243. Epub 2019
Oct 31.

Sense of coherence and acceptance of the disease in patients with lung cancer
during palliative chemotherapy.

Nowicki A(1), Sianoszek P(1), Farbicka P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology Nursing, Ludwik Rydygier Collegium Medicum in
Bydgoszcz, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Torun, Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(2)State Higher Vocational School in Koszalin, 10 Military Research Hospital and 
Polyclinic in Bydgoszcz, Poland.

Introduction: An important part of the therapeutic process of patients with lung 
cancer undergoing palliative chemotherapy is to assess their mental well-being.
Evaluation of the sense of coherence and acceptance of the disease, which
reflects the degree of adaptation of the patient to live with the disease,
provides information on this topic.
Objective: The primary objective was to assess the level of sense of coherence
and acceptance of the disease in patients with lung cancer during palliative
chemotherapy as well as coherence and acceptance together with socio-demographic 
factors. The secondary objective was to assess the economic impact of lung cancer
on these patients.
Material and methods: The study involved 100 patients with lung cancer during
palliative chemotherapy. The study was conducted using the Sense of Coherence
Questionnaire (SOC-29), the Acceptance of Illness Scale, and a socio-demographic 
questionnaire.
Results: The study group consisted mainly of men (66%), people with
primary/vocational education (63%) and patients living in cities (59%). The
average age of respondents was 62.8 years. 45% of patients had a high level of
sense of coherence, and 44% had an average level. The average overall score of
SOC was 143.9 points inside the upper range of average results. Levels of a sense
of comprehensibility, manageability, and meaningfulness remained in close
relation to the average level: 48.91, 51.33, and 43.66 points, respectively. The 
average acceptance of the disease was 45% with the average total of 27.21 points.
Conclusions: Most patients during palliative chemotherapy because of lung cancer 
had average or high level of coherence and acceptance of the disease. The level
of sense of coherence and acceptance of the disease was not affected by gender,
age, education, or place of residence. Almost all patients incur costs associated
with treatment, and in some of them the disease affected the source of income.

Copyright: © 2019 Termedia Sp. z o. o.

DOI: 10.5114/wo.2019.89243 
PMCID: PMC6883965
PMID: 31798331 


489. J Relig Health. 2020 Feb;59(1):416-427. doi: 10.1007/s10943-019-00957-w.

"Care for the Common Home": Responses to Pope Francis's Encyclical Letter.

Mayer CH(1)(2), George WM(3), Nass E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial Psychology and People Management, University of
Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South Africa. claudemayer@gmx.net.
(2)Institut für therapeutische Kommunikation und Sprachgebrauch, Europa
Universität Viadrina, Frankfurt (Oder), Germany. claudemayer@gmx.net.
(3)TransMIT Project Division for Health Services Research and Consulting,
Jahnstraße 14, 35394, Gießen, Germany.
(4)Department Ethik und Philosophie, Wilhelm Löhe Hochschule, Merkurstraße 41,
Südstadtpark, 90763, Fürth, Germany.

This article aims to build awareness of the growing global crisis in social,
economic and environmental terms from different disciplinary approaches. The
authors respond to the message of Pope Francis presented in his Encyclical Letter
published in 2015. The article provides a short current overview of the discourse
and presents three hypotheses anchored in the disciplines of Psychology, Health
and Theology for a deeper discussion of Pope Francis's viewpoints on the
challenges to humankind and how to address them. It thereby contributes to the
discourse on health and religion with regard to the Pope's message to the world
community. The article leads to an interdisciplinary conclusion and directions
for future research and practice.

DOI: 10.1007/s10943-019-00957-w 
PMID: 31797251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Int J Psychol. 2020 Aug;55(4):553-561. doi: 10.1002/ijop.12636. Epub 2019 Dec 3.

Predictors of individual, community and national resiliencies of Israeli Jews and
Arabs.

Marciano H(1)(2), Kimhi S(1), Eshel Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Tel Hai College, Qiryat Shemona, Israel.
(2)Ergonomics and Human Factors Unit, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.

The contribution of individual characteristics to predicting individual,
community and national resilience of Israeli Jews and Arabs was investigated.
Psychological resilience refers to people's assessment of their ability to
withstand negative psychological consequences of major afflictions, and to keep
functioning despite these adversities. The following hypotheses were examined: 1.
The Jewish sample would score higher than the Arab sample on indices of
individual, community and national resilience. 2. Men of both groups would score 
higher compared with women on these resilience indices. 3. Exposure to terror and
fear of upcoming war would negatively predict the resilience of both groups. 4.
Higher level of religiosity, right wing political attitudes, higher income,
higher education, older age and higher sense of coherence will positively predict
the investigated resiliencies. The random sample included 1100 Jews and 350 Arabs
who participated in an internet survey. Resilience was defined in this study as
the balance of individual, community and national strength (protective factors)
to vulnerability (risk factors). The results supported the first three hypotheses
whereas the fourth hypothesis was supported only for the Jewish sample. The
present study indicated that some predictors had universal effect on resilience, 
whereas others seemed to be culture specific predictors.

© 2019 International Union of Psychological Science.

DOI: 10.1002/ijop.12636 
PMID: 31792956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Neurol. 2021 Jun;268(6):2083-2089. doi: 10.1007/s00415-019-09654-w. Epub 2019
Dec 2.

Retinal changes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: looking at the disease through 
a new window.

Cerveró A(1), Casado A(#)(1), Riancho J(#)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Hospital Universitario Marqués de
Valdecilla-IDIVAL, Santander, Spain.
(2)Service of Neurology, Hospital Sierrallana-IDIVAL, Barrio Ganzo, s/n, 39300,
Torrelavega, Cantabria, Spain. javier.riancho86@gmail.com.
(3)CIBERNED, Madrid, Spain. javier.riancho86@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the most frequent degenerative disease
affecting motor neurons (MN). ALS has been traditionally considered as a pure
motor system disease; however, there are currently sufficient evidences
supporting the involvement of other non-motor systems. Recently, the development 
and the implementation of the optical coherence tomography (OCT) have provided
new data regarding the ocular involvement in the disease. In this sense,
alterations in retinal nerve fiber layer thickness (RNFL), other retinal layers
thicknesses such as outer nuclear layer (ONL) and inner nuclear layer (INL) and
changes in the retinal blood vessels have been described in ALS patients.
Interestingly, the study of ocular alterations in ALS appears not only as new
biomarker tool, but also as a new opportunity to deep into the pathogenesis of
the disease. In this article we will review and standardize published studies
regarding OCT and ALS, emphasizing both their strengths and weaknesses.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-019-09654-w 
PMID: 31792674  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Heart Rhythm. 2020 May;17(5 Pt A):768-776. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2019.11.026. Epub
2019 Nov 30.

Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators and patient-reported outcomes in adults
with congenital heart disease: An international study.

Lévesque V(1), Laplante L(1), Shohoudi A(1), Apers S(2), Kovacs AH(3), Luyckx
K(4), Thomet C(5), Budts W(6), Enomoto J(7), Sluman MA(8), Lu CW(9), Jackson
JL(10), Cook SC(11), Chidambarathanu S(12), Alday L(13), Eriksen K(14), Dellborg 
M(15), Berghammer M(16), Johansson B(17), Mackie AS(18), Menahem S(19), Caruana
M(20), Veldtman G(21), Soufi A(22), Fernandes SM(23), White K(24), Callus E(25), 
Kutty S(26), Brouillette J(1), Casteigt B(1), Moons P(27), Khairy P(28);
APPROACH-IS Consortium and the International Society for Adult Congenital Heart
Disease (ISACHD).

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Heart Institute, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada.
(2)KU Leuven Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Knight Cardiovascular Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland,
Oregon.
(4)KU Leuven-University of Leuven, Psychology and Development in Context, Leuven,
Belgium; UNIBS, University of the Free State, Bloemfontein, South Africa.
(5)Center for Congenital Heart Disease, Inselspital-Bern University Hospital,
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(6)Division of Congenital and Structural Cardiology, University Hospitals Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium; Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.
(7)Department of Adult Congenital Heart Disease, Chiba Cardiovascular Center,
Chiba, Japan.
(8)Department of Cardiology, Jeroen Bosch Hospital, Hertogenbosch, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands; Coronel Institute for occupational health, Academic Medical Centre, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(10)Center for Biobehavioral Health, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus,
Ohio.
(11)Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center, Helen DeVos Children's Hospital, Grand
Rapids, Michigan.
(12)Frontier Lifeline Hospital (Dr. K.M. Cherian Heart Foundation), Chennai,
India.
(13)Division of Cardiology, Hospital de Niños, Córdoba, Argentina.
(14)Department of Cardiology, Oslo University Hospital-Rikshospitalet, Oslo,
Norway.
(15)Adult Congenital Heart Unit, Sahlgrenska University Hospital/Östra,
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(16)Centre for Person-Centred Care (GPCC), University of Gothenburg and
Department of Health Sciences, University West, Trollhättan, Sweden.
(17)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå University, Umeå,
Sweden.
(18)Division of Cardiology, Stollery Children's Hospital, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Canada.
(19)Monash Medical Centre, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
(20)Department of Cardiology, Mater Dei Hospital, Birkirkara Bypass, Malta.
(21)Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center, Cincinnati Children's Hospital,
Cincinnati, Ohio.
(22)Department of Congenital Heart Disease, Louis Pradel Hospital, Lyon, France.
(23)Department of Pediatrics and Medicine, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Palo Alto, California.
(24)Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center, Washington University and Barnes
Jewish Heart & Vascular Center, University of Missouri, Saint Louis, Missouri.
(25)Clinical Psychology Service, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, Milan, Italy;
Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, Università degli Studi di Milano,
Milan, Italy.
(26)Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center, University of Nebraska Medical
Center/Children's Hospital & Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska.
(27)KU Leuven-University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; Institute of Health and Care
Sciences, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden; Department of Paediatrics
and Child Health, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(28)Montreal Heart Institute, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada.
Electronic address: paul.khairy@umontreal.ca.

BACKGROUND: Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs) are increasingly being
used to prevent sudden death in the growing population of adults with congenital 
heart disease (CHD). However, little is known about their impact on
patient-reported outcomes (PROs).
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to assess and compare PROs in adults
with CHD with and without ICDs.
METHODS: A propensity-based matching weight analysis was conducted to evaluate
PROs in an international cross-sectional study of adults with CHD from 15
countries across 5 continents.
RESULTS: A total of 3188 patients were included: 107 with ICDs and 3081
weight-matched controls without ICDs. ICD recipients were an average age of 40.1 
± 12.4 years, and >95% had moderate or complex CHD. Defibrillators were implanted
for primary and secondary prevention in 38.3% and 61.7%, respectively. Perceived 
health status, psychological distress, sense of coherence, and health behaviors
did not differ significantly among patients with and without ICDs. However, ICD
recipients had a more threatening view of their illness (relative % difference
8.56; P = .011). Those with secondary compared to primary prevention indications 
had a significantly lower quality-of-life score (Linear Analogue Scale 72.0 ±
23.1 vs 79.2 ± 13.0; P = .047). Marked geographic variations were observed.
Overall sense of well-being, assessed by a summary score that combines various
PROs, was significantly lower in ICD recipients (vs controls) from Switzerland,
Argentina, Taiwan, and the United States.
CONCLUSION: In an international cohort of adults with CHD, ICDs were associated
with a more threatening illness perception, with a lower quality of life in those
with secondary compared to primary prevention indications. However, marked
geographic variability in PROs was observed.

Copyright © 2019 Heart Rhythm Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2019.11.026 
PMID: 31790832 


493. J Public Health Dent. 2020 Jun;80(2):97-106. doi: 10.1111/jphd.12349. Epub 2019
Dec 1.

Predisposing, enabling, and need characteristics of dental services utilization
among socially deprived schoolchildren.

Maffioletti F(1), Vettore MV(2), Rebelo M(1), Herkrath F(3), Queiroz A(1),
Herkrath AP(1), Pereira J(1), Rebelo Vieira J(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, Federal University of Amazonas, Manaus, Brazil.
(2)Dental School, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(3)Superior School of Health Sciences, University of Amazonas State, Manaus,
Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: To test the relationship of predisposing, enabling and need
characteristics with dental services utilization and pattern of dental attendance
among 12-year-old schoolchildren living in a socially deprived urban area.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was carried out involving 358 children enrolled 
in public schools located in a deprived area of the city of Manaus, Brazil.
Predisposing, enabling, and need characteristics were selected according to
Andersen's behavioral conceptual model. Self-completed questionnaires were used
to collect the predisposing characteristics (child's gender, sense of coherence, 
self-esteem, oral health beliefs). Parents or guardians provided data on enabling
characteristics, including dental health insurance and socioeconomic status.
Evaluated need characteristics included oral clinical status assessed through
dental examinations conducted by five calibrated examiners. Structural equation
modeling was used to test the predictors of dental services utilization and
pattern of dental attendance.
RESULTS: Predisposing characteristics, including male gender and low
parents/guardians sense of coherence predicted poor dental services utilization
and inadequate pattern of dental attendance, respectively. Low socioeconomic
status and poor oral clinical status were linked to poor dental services
utilization and worse children's pattern of dental attendance.
CONCLUSIONS: The present findings suggest that predisposing (child's gender and
parental sense of coherence), enabling (socioeconomic conditions) and evaluated
need characteristics (oral clinical status) are associated with dental services
utilization among children.

© 2019 American Association of Public Health Dentistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jphd.12349 
PMID: 31788798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Front Psychiatry. 2019 Nov 7;10:818. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00818. eCollection
2019.

Living Conditions Influence Psychological Distress of Migrants in Long-Term
Imprisonment.

Lutz M(1), Streb J(1), Dudeck M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Ulm University, Ulm,
Germany.

Background: Serving a long-term prison sentence places a heavy psychological
burden on inmates. The concept of salutogenesis and the psychological stress
model developed by Lazarus indicate that people can handle difficult situations
if they are able to use their resources in a way that makes them feel confident
that things will work out as well as can reasonably be expected. However, during 
long-term imprisonment inmates often have restricted access to potential coping
strategies, such as close and trusting relationships. Because of
migration-related difficulties, such as poor local language skills and
experiences of discrimination, migrants in long-term imprisonment probably
experience even more psychological distress than native citizens. Aims: The aim
of the study was to compare the amount of psychological distress in migrants and 
native citizens in long-term imprisonment. In addition, we investigated whether
any aspects of living conditions in prison reduce psychological distress.
Methods: From the 1,101 participants in the European Union (EU) project
"Long-term imprisonment and the issue of human rights in member states of the
EU," we chose 49 migrants, defined as people born in a different country from
where they were imprisoned, and 49 native citizens matched for prison, age (+/-5 
years), and index offense. The participants completed a questionnaire that
included the Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI) and 128 items from a revised version
of the Mare-Balticum prison survey. Data were analyzed by multilevel regression
models. Results: Native citizens reported higher psychological distress than
migrants. However, multilevel regression analyses showed that poor relationships 
with fellow inmates and increased fear of crime were significant predictors of
increased psychological distress in migrants only. Conclusions: Being a migrant
by itself does not lead to increased psychological distress in prisoners. This
finding can be explained by the so-called healthy immigrant effect. However,
migrants experience psychological distress when prisons are not safe and when
they do not have close and trusting relationships with fellow inmates.

Copyright © 2019 Lutz, Streb and Dudeck.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00818 
PMCID: PMC6854997
PMID: 31787907 


495. Schizophr Res. 2020 Jan;215:54-60. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2019.11.032. Epub 2019
Nov 26.

Piecing together fragments: Linguistic cohesion mediates the relationship between
executive function and metacognition in schizophrenia.

Lundin NB(1), Hochheiser J(2), Minor KS(3), Hetrick WP(4), Lysaker PH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences and Program in Neuroscience,
Indiana University, 1101 E. 10th Street, Bloomington, IN 47405, United States.
Electronic address: nlundin@indiana.edu.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Richard L. Roudebush VA Medical Center, 1481 W. 10th
Street, Indianapolis, IN 46202, United States.
(3)Department of Psychology, Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis,
402 N. Blackford Street, Indianapolis, IN 46202, United States. Electronic
address: ksminor@iupui.edu.
(4)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences and Program in Neuroscience,
Indiana University, 1101 E. 10th Street, Bloomington, IN 47405, United States.
Electronic address: whetrick@indiana.edu.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Richard L. Roudebush VA Medical Center, 1481 W. 10th
Street, Indianapolis, IN 46202, United States; Indiana University School of
Medicine, department of Psychiatry Indianapolis IN. Electronic address:
plysaker@iupui.edu.

Speech disturbances are prevalent in psychosis. These may arise in part from
executive function impairment, as research suggests that inhibition and
monitoring are associated with production of cohesive discourse. However, it is
not yet understood how linguistic and executive function impairments in psychosis
interact with disrupted metacognition, or deficits in the ability to integrate
information to form a complex sense of oneself and others and use that synthesis 
to respond to psychosocial challenges. Whereas discourse studies have
historically employed manual hand-coding techniques, automated computational
tools can characterize deep semantic structures that may be closely linked with
metacognition. In the present study, we examined whether higher executive
functioning promotes metacognition by way of altering linguistic cohesion.
Ninety-four individuals with schizophrenia-spectrum disorders provided illness
narratives and completed an executive function task battery (Delis-Kaplan
Executive Function System). We assessed the narratives for linguistic cohesion
(Coh-Metrix 3.0) and metacognitive capacity (Metacognition Assessment Scale -
Abbreviated). Selected linguistic indices measured the frequency of connections
between causal and intentional content (deep cohesion), word and theme overlap
(referential cohesion), and unique word usage (lexical diversity). In path
analyses using bootstrapped confidence intervals, we found that deep cohesion and
lexical diversity independently mediated the relationship between executive
functioning and metacognitive capacity. Findings suggest that executive control
abilities support integration of mental experiences by way of increasing causal, 
goal-driven speech and word expression in individuals with schizophrenia.
Metacognitive-based therapeutic interventions for psychosis may promote insight
and recovery in part by scaffolding use of language that links ideas together.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2019.11.032 
PMCID: PMC8106973
PMID: 31784337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors
declare that they have no conflicts of interest.


496. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019 Nov 27;16(23). pii: E4733. doi:
10.3390/ijerph16234733.

A Simple Method for Assessing the Mental Health Status of Students in Higher
Education.

Bíró É(1), Ádány R(2), Kósa K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Promotion, Department of Preventive Medicine, Faculty of
Public Health, University of Debrecen, H-4028 Debrecen, Hungary.
(2)Department of Preventive Medicine, Faculty of Public Health, University of
Debrecen, H-4028 Debrecen, Hungary.

Mental health problems are common among students in higher education all over the
world, so identifying those who are at higher risk would allow the targeted
provision of help. Our goal was to develop an assessment tool to identify
students at risk for vulnerable mental health status. This tool was created from 
the 12-item General Health Questionnaire and Antonovsky's abbreviated sense of
coherence scale and was tested to distinguish between those with high or low
mental resilience. Predictive ability was characterized by likelihood ratios
taking the Beck Depression Inventory and perceived health as references.
One-quarter (95% CI 21.1% to 29.7%) of the students had been in vulnerable mental
health characterized by low sense of coherence and high distress, whereas 28.4%
(95% CI 24.2% to 33.1%) seemed resilient, having high sense of coherence and low 
distress. The high negative predictive value of the assessment tool reliably
identified resilient students in comparison with both the Beck Depression
Inventory (98.6%) and perceived health status (83.9%). Use of the assessment tool
is recommended for students to distinguish between those at decreased and
increased risk in terms of mental health. Mental health services should be
offered to students at higher risk.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph16234733 
PMCID: PMC6926560
PMID: 31783500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Eur J Oncol Nurs. 2020 Feb;44:101693. doi: 10.1016/j.ejon.2019.101693. Epub 2019 
Nov 18.

Coping strategies among patients with malignant lymphoma- a qualitative study
from the perspectives of Swedish patients.

Glasdam S(1), Bjerström C(2), Engberg de Carvalho C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Lund University,
Margaretavägen 1 B, S-222 41, Lund, Sweden. Electronic address:
Stinne.Glasdam@med.lu.se.
(2)Department of Oncology, Lund University Hospital, S-222 41, Lund, Sweden.
Electronic address: Charlotta.Bjerstrom@skane.se.
(3)Department of Oncology, Lund University Hospital, S-222 41, Lund, Sweden.
Electronic address: Cecilia.DeCarvalho@skane.se.

PURPOSE: There is a dearth of research on coping strategies of patients with
malignant lymphoma. The aim of this article is to explore how these patients cope
with cancer in everyday life.
METHOD: Semi-structured interviews were conducted with nine patients in Sweden. A
thematic analysis was made, inspired by Antonovsky's theory of sense of
coherence. The SRQR checklist was used.
RESULTS: Patient's coping strategies are shown within three themes: 'Life
experiences supported coping strategies during treatment', 'Between completed
treatment and (possible) cure', and 'Illness brought closeness and distance in
social relationships'. Three different coping strategies were identified during
treatment: trying to control the situation, seeing opportunities in difficulties,
and doing other activities to limit thoughts about disease and treatment. Four
different coping strategies were identified after treatment ended, namely
projecting responsibility and anger onto the healthcare system, maintaining the
outer facade as a strong person who had control over the situation, talking about
disease, side effects and emotions and putting the focus on the future, and
managing life by anticipating death. Family =and friends were a part of patients'
coping strategies, but to different extents and in different ways. Diagnosis and 
treatment for malignant lymphoma brought closeness and distance in social
relationships.
CONCLUSION: Patients with malignant lymphoma cope with cancer in different ways
in everyday life influenced by their life experiences and life conditions.
Further research should focus on cancer patients' coping strategies in a
relational perspective, as coping and coping opportunities are embedded in social
context and social relationships.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejon.2019.101693 
PMID: 31783326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interests No conflict of
interest declared.


498. J Occup Health. 2020 Jan;62(1):e12101. doi: 10.1002/1348-9585.12101. Epub 2019
Nov 27.

"Resources-Demands Ratio": Translating the JD-R-Model for company stakeholders.

Jenny GJ(1), Bauer GF(1), Füllemann D(2), Broetje S(1), Brauchli R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Salutogenesis, Division of Public and Organizational Health,
Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Prevention Institute, University of Zurich,
Zürich, Switzerland.
(2)Applied Psychology, University of Applied Sciences and Arts Northwestern
Switzerland, Olten, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVES: Practitioners and organizational leaders are calling for practical
ways to explain and monitor factors that affect workplace health and
productivity. This article builds on the well-established Job Demands-Resources
(JD-R) model and proposes an empirically tested ratio that aggregates indicators 
of job resources and demands. In this study, we calculate a ratio of
generalizable job resources and demands derived from the JD-R model and then
translate the ratio into the language of company stakeholders.
METHODS: We calculated a ratio based on measures applied in a large stress
management intervention study (n = 2983) and report the findings from
cross-sectional analysis with health and productivity outcomes from same-source
and separate-source data.
RESULTS: Findings showed a strong and unambiguous increase in health and
productivity measures with each step of increase in the ratio. Loss in explained 
variance due to aggregation of two factors into a single ratio is small for
measures which are known to be predicted by both factors simultaneously.
CONCLUSIONS: A translation and visualization of the ratio that is accessible to
practitioners and organizational leaders is presented and its use in companies
discussed.

© 2019 The Authors. Journal of Occupational Health published by John Wiley & Sons
Australia, Ltd on behalf of The Japan Society for Occupational Health.

DOI: 10.1002/1348-9585.12101 
PMCID: PMC6970389
PMID: 31773879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Clin Med. 2019 Nov 21;8(12). pii: E2043. doi: 10.3390/jcm8122043.

Influence of the Sense of Coherence, the Doctor-Patient Relationship, Optimism
and Non-Haematological Adverse Reactions on Health-Related Quality of Life in
Patients with Breast Cancer.

Prieto-Callejero B(1), Rivera F(2), Andrés-Villas M(3), Gómez-Salgado J(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Virgen de la Bella, Lepe 21440, Spain.
(2)Department of Experimental Psychology, Faculty of Psychology, University of
Seville, 41018 Seville, Spain.
(3)Department of Social, Developmental and Educational Psychology, Faculty of
Education Sciences, University of Huelva, 21071 Huelva, Spain.
(4)Department of Sociology, Social Work and Public Health, University School of
Social Work, University of Huelva, 21071 Huelva, Spain.
(5)Safety and Health Postgraduate Programme, Universidad Espíritu Santo,
Guayaquil 091650, Ecuador.

Breast cancer is the most common malignant tumour in women around the world. The 
objective of this study was to quantify the number of non-haematological adverse 
reactions associated with chemotherapy, as well as to assess the effect of the
sense of coherence, optimism-pessimism and the quality of the doctor-patient
relationship on the quality of life of breast cancer patients. To this end, a
cross-sectional descriptive study was conducted involving 110 breast cancer
patients who were treated with docetaxel, epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide during
the period 2012-2014. The difference in the quality of life in patients who have 
five or fewer toxicities compared to those with more than six is highlighted.
This difference is not as important when comparing patients with 6 to 10
toxicities and those with more than 10. The multivariate model used in this study
corroborates the direct implication of the sense of coherence on the quality of
life and adds the number of adverse reactions as a new construct. This has
virtually the same impact on the quality of life of these patients, but in
reverse. In conclusion, to improve the quality of life of breast cancer patients 
it would be necessary to have an impact on the number of adverse reactions
involved in chemotherapeutic treatment, as well as on psychological
interventions, with the sense of coherence as a possible starting point.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm8122043 
PMCID: PMC6947165
PMID: 31766496 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


500. Sensors (Basel). 2019 Nov 21;19(23). pii: E5087. doi: 10.3390/s19235087.

Automatic Identification and Representation of the Cornea-Contact Lens
Relationship Using AS-OCT Images.

Cabaleiro P(1)(2), de Moura J(1)(2), Novo J(1)(2), Charlón P(3)(4), Ortega
M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de investigación CITIC, Universidade da Coruña, 15071 A Coruña, Spain.
(2)VARPA, Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de A Coruña (INIBIC), Universidade
da Coruña, 15006 A Coruña, Spain.
(3)Instituto Oftalmológico Victoria de Rojas, 15009 A Coruña, Spain.
(4)Hospital HM Rosaleda, 15701 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

The clinical study of the cornea-contact lens relationship is widely used in the 
process of adaptation of the scleral contact lens (SCL) to the ocular morphology 
of patients. In that sense, the measurement of the adjustment between the SCL and
the cornea can be used to study the comfort or potential damage that the lens may
produce in the eye. The current analysis procedure implies the manual inspection 
of optical coherence tomography of the anterior segment images (AS-OCT) by the
clinical experts. This process presents several limitations such as the inability
to obtain complex metrics, the inaccuracies of the manual measurements or the
requirement of a time-consuming process by the expert in a tedious process, among
others. This work proposes a fully-automatic methodology for the extraction of
the areas of interest in the study of the cornea-contact lens relationship and
the measurement of representative metrics that allow the clinicians to measure
quantitatively the adjustment between the lens and the eye. In particular, three 
distance metrics are herein proposed: Vertical, normal to the tangent of the
region of interest and by the nearest point. Moreover, the images are classified 
to characterize the analysis as belonging to the central cornea, peripheral
cornea, limbus or sclera (regions where the inner layer of the lens has already
joined the cornea). Finally, the methodology graphically presents the results of 
the identified segmentations using an intuitive visualization that facilitates
the analysis and diagnosis of the patients by the clinical experts.

DOI: 10.3390/s19235087 
PMCID: PMC6929080
PMID: 31766394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]




# List item 2 ------------------------------


1. Health Promot Int. 2020 Oct 1;35(5):1180-1189. doi: 10.1093/heapro/daz114.

Resources in vulnerable young adults: self-assessments during preventive
consultation with their general practitioner in Denmark.

Freund KS(1), Guassora AD(2), Hegelund T(3), Hvas L(2), Lous J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for General Practice, Aalborg University, Fyrkildevej 7, DK-9200
Aalborg Ø, Denmark.
(2)The Research Unit and Section of General Practice, Department of Public
Health, University of Copenhagen, Ø. Farimagsgade 5,opg.Q, DK-1014 Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(3)Hovedgaden 43, DK-2970 Hoersholm, Denmark.
(4)Research Unit of General Practice, Southern University, J. B. Winsløvs Vej 9A,
DK-5000 Odense, Denmark.

Inequality in health is increasing. People with many problems often lack energy
to improve well-being and reduce their problems. This study analyses how
psycho-socially challenged younger (20- to 44-year-old) patients described their 
own resources to reach lifestyle goals or alter life circumstances. Within the
context of a randomized controlled trial, Danish participants had two structured 
preventive person-centred consultations with their general practitioner.
Consultations focused on well-being, salutogenesis, resources, barriers and
support of autonomy. Using the qualitative method: Systematic Text Condensation, 
we made thematic cross-analysis of patients' goal-specific resource statements
described at the first consultation. Of the 209 patients, 191 (91%) chose one or 
two goals for a better life next year; nearly all (179) could recall and describe
which resources they would use to reach their goal. We categorized resource
statements into (i) personal constitution as 'willpower' and 'tenacity'; (ii)
network, e.g. family; (iii) personal experience with identical or similar
problems. Some patients needed to free up resources by handling psychological
problems before being able to focus on lifestyle goals. The study demonstrates
that patients with particular psycho-social problems could describe essential
resources in a structured, salutogenic, preventive consultation with their
general practitioner. Reflecting intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, these
resources reflected dimensions of essential health theories like sense of
coherence, self-efficacy and self-determination theory. Increased awareness of
these resources seems essential for vulnerable patients by improving
psychological well-being and optimism, thereby facilitating health-related
changes. This may be an important step to reducing inequality in health.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/daz114 
PMCID: PMC7585525
PMID: 31750922 


2. Patient Prefer Adherence. 2019 Oct 25;13:1839-1850. doi: 10.2147/PPA.S228670.
eCollection 2019.

Illness Perceptions, HbA1c, And Adherence In Type 2 Diabetes In Saudi Arabia.

Alyami M(1), Serlachius A(1), Mokhtar I(2), Broadbent E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological Medicine, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, 
The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(2)Diabetes and Endocrine Centre, Department of Internal Medicine, King Khaled
Hospital, Ministry of Health, Najran, Saudi Arabia.

Purpose: Little is known about predictors of adherence to diabetes medication in 
Saudi Arabia. This study aimed to investigate whether illness perceptions,
beliefs about medicine, and God locus of health control beliefs were associated
with adherence to medication and glycaemic control (HbA1c) in Saudi patients with
type 2 diabetes (T2D).
Patients and methods: A convenience sample of 115 adults with T2D were recruited 
from a diabetes outpatient clinic. Validated self-reported measures of adherence 
to medication, illness perceptions, beliefs about medicine, and God locus of
health control were administered. Patients' most recent HbA1c levels were
extracted from medical records. Multivariable logistic and linear regressions
were used to examine the association between illness perceptions, beliefs about
medicine and adherence to medication and HbA1c.
Results: More than two thirds of patients (69%) reported poor adherence to
medication. All illness perceptions domains, beliefs about medicine, and God
locus of health control beliefs were associated with adherence. Multivariable
logistic regression revealed that older age (OR= 3.76, p= 0.023), worse
consequences perceptions (OR= 0.21, p= 0.011), worse illness identity (OR= 0.23, 
p= 0.010), and greater illness coherence (OR= 3.24, p= 0.022) were independent
predictors of adherence. Two thirds of patients (67%) had suboptimal HbA1c; and
perceptions of a cyclical timeline and lower insulin effectiveness were
associated with higher HbA1c. In multiple linear regression, perceptions of a
cyclical timeline (β= 0.19, p= 0.040) were an independent significant predictor
of HbA1c.
Conclusion: In Saudi Arabia, patients' perceptions of T2D, beliefs about
medicine, and God locus of control beliefs are associated with adherence. These
results inform the development of interventions based on the Common-Sense Model
(CSM) to encourage improved adherence and glycaemic control among Saudi patients 
with T2D. Further research with larger and more diverse samples is warranted to
expand the generalizability of these findings.

© 2019 Alyami et al.

DOI: 10.2147/PPA.S228670 
PMCID: PMC6818533
PMID: 31749610 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.


3. Cogn Sci. 2019 Nov;43(11):e12796. doi: 10.1111/cogs.12796.

Novel Labels Increase Category Coherence, But Only When People Have the Goal to
Coordinate.

Suffill E(1), Branigan H(1), Pickering M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh.

From infancy, we recognize that labels denote category membership and help us to 
identify the critical features that objects within a category share. Labels not
only reflect how we categorize, but also allow us to communicate and share
categories with others. Given the special status of labels as markers of category
membership, do novel labels (i.e., non-words) affect the way in which adults
select dimensions for categorization in unsupervised settings? Additionally, is
the purpose of this effect primarily coordinative (i.e., do labels promote shared
understanding of how we categorize objects)? To address this, we conducted two
experiments in which participants individually categorized images of mountains
with or without novel labels, and with or without a goal of coordination, within 
a non-communicative paradigm. People who sorted items with novel labels had more 
similar categories than people who sorted without labels only when they were told
that their categories should make sense to other people, and not otherwise. We
argue that sorters' goals determine whether novel labels promote the development 
of socially coherent categories.

© 2019 Cognitive Science Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/cogs.12796 
PMID: 31742758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Psychosom Med. 2020 Feb/Mar;82(2):181-186. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000768.

Association of Copeptin With Sense of Coherence in Individuals With Varying
Degrees of Glucose Intolerance.

Madhu SV(1), Aslam M, Siddiqui AA, Goyal S, Mishra BK.

Author information: 
(1)From the Centre for Diabetes Endocrinology and Metabolism, University College 
of Medical Sciences (University of Delhi) and GTB Hospital, Delhi, India.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to examine the association of serum copeptin levels, 
a surrogate marker of arginine-vasopressin secretion with sense of coherence
(SOC) among individuals with varying degrees of glucose intolerance.
METHODS: The study was conducted in 120 age- and sex-matched individuals who were
divided equally into three groups. Group A included individuals with normal
glucose tolerance; group B, individuals with prediabetes (impaired glucose
tolerance and/or impaired fasting glucose); and group C, individuals with newly
detected diabetes mellitus (NDDM). SOC, perceived stress scale (PSS), copeptin,
anthropometry, glycated hemoglobin, insulin, and salivary cortisol were measured 
in all study participants.
RESULTS: The SOC score was found to be significantly lower in group C compared
with group A (p < .001) and group B (p = .006). The PSS score was found to be
significantly higher in group C compared with group A (p = .002). No significant 
difference was found between PSS scores of groups B and C (p = .25). Copeptin
levels were found to be significantly higher in group C compared with group A (p 
= .016). Copeptin levels in group C did not differ significantly from those in
group B (p = .056). There was a significant negative correlation between serum
copeptin levels and SOC in the NDDM group C (r = 0.31, p = .048) and overall (r =
0.19, p = .037). In multiple regression analysis, SOC emerged as the variable
with the strongest association with 2-hour postprandial plasma glucose and
glycated hemoglobin.
CONCLUSION: Individuals with NDDM displayed significantly higher serum copeptin
levels that inversely correlated with SOC, a global measure of stress coping
ability.

DOI: 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000768 
PMID: 31738318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Front Hum Neurosci. 2019 Oct 31;13:378. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2019.00378.
eCollection 2019.

The Easy Part of the Hard Problem: A Resonance Theory of Consciousness.

Hunt T(1), Schooler JW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of California, Santa Barbara,
Santa Barbara, CA, United States.

Erratum in
    Front Hum Neurosci. 2020 Sep 04;14:596409.

Synchronization, harmonization, vibrations, or simply resonance in its most
general sense seems to have an integral relationship with consciousness itself.
One of the possible "neural correlates of consciousness" in mammalian brains is a
specific combination of gamma, beta and theta electrical synchrony. More broadly,
we see similar kinds of resonance patterns in living and non-living structures of
many types. What clues can resonance provide about the nature of consciousness
more generally? This paper provides an overview of resonating structures in the
fields of neuroscience, biology and physics and offers a possible solution to
what we see as the "easy part" of the "Hard Problem" of consciousness, which is
generally known as the "combination problem." The combination problem asks: how
do micro-conscious entities combine into a higher-level macro-consciousness? The 
proposed solution in the context of mammalian consciousness suggests that a
shared resonance is what allows different parts of the brain to achieve a phase
transition in the speed and bandwidth of information flows between the
constituent parts. This phase transition allows for richer varieties of
consciousness to arise, with the character and content of that consciousness in
each moment determined by the particular set of constituent neurons. We also
offer more general insights into the ontology of consciousness and suggest that
consciousness manifests as a continuum of increasing richness in all physical
processes, distinguishing our view from emergentist materialism. We refer to this
approach, a meta-synthesis, as a (general) resonance theory of consciousness. We 
offer some suggestions for testing the theory.

Copyright © 2019 Hunt and Schooler.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2019.00378 
PMCID: PMC6834646
PMID: 31736728 


6. Opt Lett. 2019 Nov 15;44(22):5513-5516. doi: 10.1364/OL.44.005513.

Stereographic geometry of coherence and which-path information.

Maleki Y.

Recently, it was shown that quantum entanglement is an indispensable part of the 
duality behavior of light. Here we report a surprisingly intimate connection
between the stereographic projection and the duality-entanglement nature of a
single photon. We show that the duality-entanglement relation [Optica5, 942
(2018)OPTIC82334-253610.1364/OPTICA.5.000942] naturally emerges from the
stereographic projection geometry. We demonstrate that this geometry is
complementarity sensitive, in the sense that it is sensitive to the particle
nature, wave nature, and entanglement nature of a single photon.

DOI: 10.1364/OL.44.005513 
PMID: 31730096 


7. Tunis Med. 2019 May;97(5):716-721.

The interest of the OCT spectral Domain for the diagnosis of the acromatopsia.

Fekih O, Bellaej M, Zgolli HM, Bakir K, Mabrouk S, Nacef L.

AIM: the interest of the OCT spectral Domain for the diagnosis of the
acromatopsia.
CASE REPORT:   It's about 2 brothers consulting for low vision. The big brother, 
has a vision of 1/ 20 in two eyes. The anterior segment and the fundus
examination were normals. The OCT SD shows a disappearance of the ellipsoid line 
in the macular region with an optic hole. The Global ERG has demonstrated flat
plots in photopic component and normal in scotopic component. The ishihara test
has showed an absence of the chromatic sense. The acromatopsia was the selected
diagnosis.  The exam of the second brother showed a visual acuity limited 1/20 in
the right eye and counting finger in the left eye, associated to photophobia and 
nystagmus. The OCT and global ERG gave the same results.
CONCLUSION: The typical clinical picture with the ERG's data gave the diagnosis
of the acromatopsia. An early diagnosis is necessary for a suitable life of the
patient and genetic consulting. This paper demonstrated the importance of the OCT
SD for the diagnosis when it's correclated to the clinic.


PMID: 31729746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Vasc Nurs. 2019 Sep;37(3):160-168. doi: 10.1016/j.jvn.2019.06.002. Epub 2019
Aug 16.

Life is about so much more: Patients' experiences of health, well-being, and
recovery after operation of abdominal aortic aneurysm with open and endovascular 
treatment-A prospective study.

Pettersson ME(1), Bergbom I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Department, Institute of Health and Care Sciences, Sahlgrenska
Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Sweden,
Göteborg, Sweden. Electronic address: Monica.e.pettersson@vgregion.se.
(2)Institute of Health and Care Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy at the University
of Gothenburg, Sweden, Göteborg, Sweden.

Different surgical treatments for abdominal aortic aneurysm can lead to different
perceptions of health and well-being. The aim of this study was to describe
patients' well-being, sense of coherence (SOC), and experiences of surgery after 
open and endovascular treatment one month and one and 2 years after the
procedure. Seventy six patients participated (40 open repair; 36 endovascular
aneurysm repair). The study was conducted using the SOC questionnaire, and
specific questions about patients' experiences of the surgical treatment and
well-being. After 2 years, no patient regretted the operation or considered it to
be the most difficult experience they had ever had. Twenty percent of the
patients were worried about complications one month after the operation. Both
groups experienced difficulty in returning to normal activity after surgery at
one month. At one and 2 years after the surgery, patients in both groups stated
that it was other things in life that affected their well-being. The endovascular
aneurysm repair group reported a significant decrease in SOC from baseline until 
one year (P = .012) and 2 years (P = .033). The open repair group reported a
significant decrease after one year (0.033). The operation did not affect
patients' way of thinking about the disease. Patients in both groups stated that 
it was other circumstances in life that affected their well-being one and 2 years
after the treatment, which could indicate that long-term follow-up would not be
necessary from a patient perspective. The operation affects patients' well-being 
a short time after the operation.

Copyright © 2019 Society for Vascular Nursing. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jvn.2019.06.002 
PMID: 31727308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Nurse Educ Today. 2020 Jan;84:104261. doi: 10.1016/j.nedt.2019.104261. Epub 2019 
Nov 6.

Building therapeutic connections with the acutely ill through standardised
patient simulation in nurse education an evaluation study.

Webster KEF(1), Carlson E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Malmö University, Department of Care Science, 205 06 Malmö, Sweden. Electronic
address: Katherine.webster@mau.se.
(2)Malmö University, Department of Care Science, 205 06 Malmö, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Phenomenological empathy and sense of coherence are two researched
communication approaches used to improve therapeutic connections with patients in
a variety of nurse related settings. The aim of this study is to evaluate
students' feedback concerning how this event has enabled that understanding,
development and refinement of skill-sets in PE and SoC when managing the acutely 
ill during simulation.
METHODS: 114 third year bachelor degree-nursing students were given the
opportunity to complete an evaluation, developed for the specific purpose of this
study. The evaluation contained six closed questions on a four point Likert-scale
and three open questions, handed out upon completion of the standardised patient 
simulation of the acutely ill. Comments written in response to the open questions
were analysed using manifest content analysis and closed questions using SPSS to 
produce descriptive frequencies.
RESULTS: 100 students completed the evaluation. Student nurses', regardless of
previous experience or age, indicated the need for more education and practice in
phenomenological empathy and sense of coherence to enhance their ability to build
therapeutic connections with the acutely ill.
CONCLUSIONS: Teaching phenomenological empathy and sense of coherence, as an
integral part of standardised patient simulation is necessary to motivate student
nurses ability to build therapeutic relationships with the acutely ill to enhance
person centred care.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nedt.2019.104261 
PMID: 31722281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Patient Educ Couns. 2020 Apr;103(4):764-776. doi: 10.1016/j.pec.2019.10.017. Epub
2019 Oct 25.

Systematic review of salutogenic-oriented lifestyle randomised controlled trials 
for adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Polhuis CMM(1), Bouwman LI(2), Vaandrager L(2), Soedamah-Muthu SS(3), Koelen
MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Health and Society, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Electronic address: kristel.polhuis@wur.nl.
(2)Health and Society, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Center of Research on Psychological and Somatic disorders (CORPS), Department 
of Medical and Clinical Psychology, Tilburg University, Tilburg, The Netherlands;
Institute for Food, Nutrition and Health, University of Reading, Reading, United 
Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: Describe the characteristics (development, intensity, deliverers,
setting, strategies) and assess the effect of salutogenic-oriented lifestyle
interventions on physical and psychosocial health outcomes in adults with type 2 
diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
METHOD: PubMed, Scopus and PsycINFO were systematically searched for randomised
controlled trials (RCTs) published up to August 2019 that complied with
predefined salutogenic criteria: the participant as a whole, the participant's
active involvement and the participant's individual learning process.
Characteristics of the salutogenic-oriented interventions with and without
significant results were compared and qualitatively summarised.
RESULTS: Twenty-eight RCTs were identified. Salutogenic oriented interventions
that significantly improved both physical and psychosocial health were
characterized by being based on formative research, culturally targeted, and
delivered in 10-20 sessions in group settings, whereas salutogenic oriented
interventions that neither improved physical or psychosocial health significantly
were characterized by being individually tailored and delivered in less than 10
group sessions in individual settings.
CONCLUSIONS: This systematic review suggests that salutogenic-oriented lifestyle 
interventions are effective for physical and psychosocial health in the short
term. More research is needed to determine how intervention characteristics
moderate (long-term) effectiveness.
PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS: The results provide a basis for purposefully developing
effective salutogenic interventions for adults with T2DM.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pec.2019.10.017 
PMID: 31711677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that there are no conflicts of interest.


11. Health Promot Int. 2020 Oct 1;35(5):1168-1179. doi: 10.1093/heapro/daz112.

The relationship between resourceful working conditions, work-related and general
sense of coherence.

Broetje S(1), Bauer GF(1), Jenny GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Prevention Institute, Center of Salutogenesis,
University of Zurich, Hirschengraben 84, Zurich 8001, Switzerland.

Sense of coherence (SoC) has been identified as an important health resource and 
is associated with various health-related outcomes, especially perceived health
and mental health. SoC has also been found to be relevant in the work context.
Our study examined whether job resources, such as autonomy or social support, can
contribute to the development of SoC. We also examined the role of the
setting-specific work-related sense of coherence (Work-SoC) as well as reciprocal
relationships between the three variables. Participants (941) from Germany,
Switzerland and Austria completed our questionnaires at three waves of data
collection. Structural equation modeling was used to identify the best fitting
model and interpret the relationships between variables. Our first hypothesis
that job resources predict Work-SoC and that Work-SoC predicts SoC was confirmed.
We also found support for our second hypothesis that SoC predicts Work-SoC and
that Work-SoC predicts job resources. The indirect effects through Work-SoC were 
only marginally significant in both directions. Our findings illustrate complex
and multidirectional relationships between the variables. Job resources seem to
contribute to the strengthening of Work-SoC, which seems to set in motion a gain 
cycle of improved job resources, which again contribute to a higher Work-SoC.
Over time, this might contribute to strengthening general SoC. However, our
findings showed that SoC was highly stable over the observed 3-month interval,
limiting the effect any other variable could exert on it. Future research should 
further examine the mechanisms and timeframes over which a setting-specific SoC
contributes to the development of overall SoC.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/daz112 
PMID: 31711151 


12. Int J Paediatr Dent. 2020 Mar;30(2):171-180. doi: 10.1111/ipd.12594. Epub 2019
Nov 29.

Oral status, sense of coherence, religious-spiritual coping, socio-economic
characteristics, and quality of life in young patients.

Soares TRC(1), Lenzi MM(1), Leite IM(1), Muniz Loureiro J(2), Leão ATT(2),
Pomarico L(1), Neiva da Silva A(3), Risso PA(2), Vettore MV(4), Maia LC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry and Orthodontics, School of Dentistry,
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Department of Dental Clinic, School of Dentistry, Federal University of Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Department of Health and Society, Institute of Collective Health, Universidade
Federal Fluminense, Niteroi, Brazil.
(4)Unit of Dental Public Health, School of Clinical Dentistry, University of
Sheffield, UK.

BACKGROUND: Several factors can influence the oral health.
AIM: To explore the clinical factors, individual characteristics, and
environmental factors (religious-spiritual coping-RSC, sense of coherence [SOC], 
and socio-economic status) related to oral status and impact on oral
health-related quality of life (OHRQoL) of children/adolescents (C/A).
DESIGN: This study evaluated C/A up to 15 years old and their caregivers. Number 
of decayed (NDT) and missing teeth (NMT); history of dental trauma; caregiver's
RSC and SOC, socio-economic factors, and OHRQoL were evaluated. Theoretical model
exploring the direct and indirect effects was tested using a structural equation 
analysis.
RESULTS: For younger group (0-6 years), having more NDT or more NMT had a greater
impact on the OHRQoL (β = 0.382, β = 0.203, respectively). In the oldest group
(7-15 years), a higher SOC had an inverse relationship with the impact on the
family OHRQoL (β=-0.201). The higher the age of the C/A, the lower the NDT
(β=-0.235), and the higher the family income the lower, the need for social
benefit (β = 0.275). Indirect relationships were observed between schooling with 
social benefit and OHRQoL in younger group. The family income indirectly
influenced the OHRQoL in oldest group.
CONCLUSIONS: Quality of life is affected directly and indirectly by environmental
characteristics, oral status, and the age of patients.

© 2019 BSPD, IAPD and John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ipd.12594 
PMID: 31710730  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Eur J Ophthalmol. 2021 Mar;31(2):NP81-NP85. doi: 10.1177/1120672119886177. Epub
2019 Nov 6.

Inverted internal limiting membrane-flap technique to treat a full-thickness
macular hole complicating idiopathic macular telangiectasia type 2.

Sborgia G(1), Niro A(2), Coassin M(3), Sborgia L(1), D'Oria F(1), Pastore V(1),
Albano V(1), Tritto T(1), Sborgia A(1)(2), Boscia F(4), Alessio G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Neurosciences and Sense Organs,
University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
(2)Eye Clinic, Hospital "S. G. MOSCATI," ASL TA, Statte, Italy.
(3)Ophthalmology, University Campus Bio-Medico of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Surgical, Microsurgical and Medical Sciences, Eye Clinic,
University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Full-thickness macular hole is a complication of idiopathic
macular telangiectasia type 2 with a low surgical closure rate and a poor
functional recovery. We analyze morphologic and functional outcomes after an
inverted internal limiting membrane-flap technique for full-thickness macular
hole complicating idiopathic macular telangiectasia type 2 using optical
coherence tomography and microperimetry.
CASE REPORT: A 77-year-old man presented us complaining visual impairment in the 
left eye (20/40) due to a full-thickness macular hole complicating idiopathic
macular telangiectasia type 2. The patient underwent vitrectomy with an inverted 
internal limiting membrane-flap technique and injection of 22% SF6 gas. Optical
coherence tomography and functional analysis, including visual acuity test and
microperimetry, were performed before surgery and over 3 months. Optical
coherence tomography scans revealed macular hole closure at 1-month follow-up.
Visual acuity and retinal sensitivity improved from 20/40 to 20/20 and from 13.1 
to 14.9 dB, respectively. Fixation stability (bivariate contour ellipse area)
improved from 2.02 to 1.58 deg2, from 5.44 to 4.24 deg2 and from 9.72 to
7.58 deg2, at 68%, 95%, and 99% of fixation points, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Inverted internal limiting membrane-flap technique may be an
alternative approach in patients with full-thickness macular hole complicating
diopathic macular telangiectasia type 2, and microperimetry may be a useful tool 
to analyze related functional changes.

DOI: 10.1177/1120672119886177 
PMID: 31690102  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Heliyon. 2019 Oct 23;5(10):e02705. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e02705.
eCollection 2019 Oct.

Illness representations among adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder: associations with quality of life, coping, and treatment adherence.

Wong IYT(1), Hawes DJ(1), Dar-Nimrod I(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, The University of Sydney, Australia.

Research into the causes and outcomes of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) has been extensive, yet little is known about the perception of ADHD as a 
disorder and its related outcomes among diagnosed youth. The present study
applied the Common-Sense Model of Illness Representations (CSM) to examine the
perception of ADHD and its association with quality of life (QoL), coping
strategies, and treatment adherence among 63 diagnosed adolescents (10-18 years).
Adolescents recruited from clinics, parent support groups, and an educational
service completed self-report measures of the key constructs. Results indicated
that adolescents generally perceive their ADHD as mildly threatening; four
illness beliefs (perceived impact, personal control, timeline, and coherence) are
significant predictors of coping and four (perceived impact, causes, personal
control, and treatment control) are that of QoL. Adolescents who perceived
minimal impact, expected longer duration, had strong sense of coherence, and
believed in personal control of ADHD coped with the disorder more actively. Those
who made weaker attribution to psychological and environmental causes, believed
in personal control and the effectiveness of behavioral treatment enjoyed better 
QoL. In addition, female adolescents seem to experience more difficulties in the 
management of ADHD than male counterparts. These findings have potentially
important clinical implications, suggesting that perceptions of ADHD related to
the disorder's impact, duration, coherence, and personal control, may be
important for clinicians to address when caring for adolescents with the
disorder.

© 2019 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e02705 
PMCID: PMC6820282
PMID: 31687524 


15. Int J Nurs Stud. 2020 Jan;101:103398. doi: 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2019.103398. Epub
2019 Aug 21.

Application of the salutogenic theory in the perinatal period: A systematic mixed
studies review.

Shorey S(1), Ng ED(2).

Author information: 
(1)Alice Lee Centre for Nursing Studies, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Level 2, Clinical Research Centre, Block MD11, 
10 Medical Drive, Singapore 117597, Singapore. Electronic address:
nurssh@nus.edu.sg.
(2)Alice Lee Centre for Nursing Studies, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Level 2, Clinical Research Centre, Block MD11, 
10 Medical Drive, Singapore 117597, Singapore. Electronic address:
nuresp@nus.edu.sg.

BACKGROUND: The pregnancy process has always been medicalized with a focus on the
prevention of adverse pregnancy outcomes and a lesser emphasis on enhancing
women's wellbeing during the perinatal period. This trend urges healthcare
professionals to consider the use of a salutogenic approach throughout the
perinatal period.
OBJECTIVE: To consolidate and appraise evidence on the use of the salutogenic
theory across the perinatal period.
DESIGN: A systematic mixed studies review.
METHODS: Four electronic databases (CINAHL, ScienceDirect, PsycINFO, and PubMed) 
were searched for English studies from each database's inception to November
2018. Thirty-four studies met the inclusion criteria and were appraised for
quality by two researchers independently. A narrative synthesis was conducted to 
consolidate and synthesize results from mixed methodology studies.
RESULTS: Four themes emerged from the synthesis: (1) factors affecting sense of
coherence (generalized resistance resources), (2) influences of sense of
coherence, (3) ways to promote sense of coherence among mothers, and (4) use of
salutogenic framework across perinatal healthcare. Sociodemographic background,
psychological and birth-related factors, and availability of social support
affect sense of coherence among parents, which are positively correlated to
quality of relationship, satisfaction of perceived support, psychological
wellbeing, and overall birth experience. Sense of coherence also determines
mothering orientation and choice of delivery method. Ways to enhance maternal
sense of coherence include ensuring continuity of care in the postpartum period, 
increasing parental involvement, focusing on wellness topics, and having balanced
relationships between parents and healthcare providers.
CONCLUSION: Despite consolidating evidence on positive relationships of
generalized resistance resources, sense of coherence, and parental outcomes
during the perinatal period, the scarcity of literature highlights a need for
more in-depth research on the underlying mechanisms of salutogenesis and its
components as these insights may underpin future maternal health promotion
efforts.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2019.103398 
PMID: 31678840  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Diabetes Complications. 2020 Jan;34(1):107467. doi:
10.1016/j.jdiacomp.2019.107467. Epub 2019 Oct 22.

Changes in diabetes distress among people with type 2 diabetes during a risk
screening programme for diabetic kidney disease - Longitudinal observations of
the PRIORITY study.

Joensen LE(1), Madsen KP(2), Frimodt-Møller M(3), Tofte N(4), Willaing I(5),
Lindhardt M(6), Rossing P(7).

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen, Niels Steensens Vej 2, 2820 Gentofte,
Denmark. Electronic address: lene.eide.joensen@regionh.dk.
(2)Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen, Niels Steensens Vej 2, 2820 Gentofte,
Denmark. Electronic address: kristoffer.panduro.madsen@regionh.dk.
(3)Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen, Niels Steensens Vej 2, 2820 Gentofte,
Denmark. Electronic address: marie.frimodt-moeller@regionh.dk.
(4)Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen, Niels Steensens Vej 2, 2820 Gentofte,
Denmark. Electronic address: nete.tofte@regionh.dk.
(5)Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen, Niels Steensens Vej 2, 2820 Gentofte,
Denmark. Electronic address: ingrid.willaing.tapager@regionh.dk.
(6)Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen, Niels Steensens Vej 2, 2820 Gentofte,
Denmark. Electronic address: morten.kofod.lindhardt@regionh.dk.
(7)Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen, Niels Steensens Vej 2, 2820 Gentofte,
Denmark; Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej
3B, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark. Electronic address: peter.rossing@regionh.dk.

AIMS: To investigate levels and changes in diabetes distress over the course of
the PRIORITY (Proteomic prediction and Renin angiotensin aldosterone system
Inhibition prevention Of early diabetic nephRopathy In people with TYpe 2
diabetes and normoalbuminuria) randomised controlled trial of screening for
diabetic kidney disease (DKD) risk among people with type 2 diabetes (T2D) at a
specialist diabetes clinic in Denmark.
METHODS: Of 436 trial participants with T2D, 216 were invited to complete the
17-item diabetes distress scale at the time of screening (T1, n = 180),
immediately after receiving the screening results at 6-8 weeks (T2, n = 169), and
at 12 months follow up (T3, n = 107). Linear mixed models were used to explore
changes in diabetes distress.
RESULTS: No significant changes in diabetes distress were observed between the
time of screening, receiving results, and at 12 months. Changes in diabetes
distress were not influenced by diabetes empowerment, sense of coherence, or
perceived support for diabetes self-management.
CONCLUSIONS: In contrast to previous studies demonstrating that screening
programmes can have negative psychological consequences, our findings indicate
that participating in this screening programme for DKD does not influence
emotional burden or physician-related distress among people with T2D.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jdiacomp.2019.107467 
PMID: 31676252  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Health Psychol. 2021 Jan;26(1):12-25. doi: 10.1177/1359105319884597. Epub 2019 
Nov 1.

The five factor model of personality and sense of coherence: A meta-analysis.

Barańczuk U(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Warsaw, Poland.

The aim of the study was to evaluate the relation between the big five
personality traits and sense of coherence. Data for the meta-analysis were
collected from 19 studies which included 24 independent samples, 133 effect
sizes, and 19,960 participants. Lower neuroticism and higher extraversion,
openness to experience, agreeableness, and conscientiousness were associated with
total sense of coherence as well as comprehensibility, manageability,
meaningfulness, and reflection dimensions. Personality traits were not linked to 
balance. There were no moderating effects on these relationships. The study
extends current knowledge on the associations between personality traits and
sense of coherence.

DOI: 10.1177/1359105319884597 
PMID: 31674211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019 Oct 29;16(21). pii: E4173. doi:
10.3390/ijerph16214173.

Assessment of Anxiety and Depression in Polish Primary Parental Caregivers of
Children with Cerebral Palsy Compared to a Control Group, as well as
Identification of Selected Predictors.

Gugała B(1)(2), Penar-Zadarko B(3), Pięciak-Kotlarz D(4), Wardak K(5),
Lewicka-Chomont A(6), Futyma-Ziaja M(7), Opara J(8).

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Rzeszów University, 35-959 Rzeszow, Poland.
bgugala@ur.edu.pl.
(2)Center for Innovative Research in Medical and Natural Sciences, University of 
Rzeszów, 35-959 Rzeszow, Poland. bgugala@ur.edu.pl.
(3)Medical College of Rzeszów University, 35-959 Rzeszow, Poland.
beata.penar@yahoo.com.
(4)Medical College of Rzeszów University, 35-959 Rzeszow, Poland.
werhub0@tlen.pl.
(5)Medical College of Rzeszów University, 35-959 Rzeszow, Poland.
wardakk@interia.pl.
(6)Medical College of Rzeszów University, 35-959 Rzeszow, Poland.
aneta.lewchom@gmail.com.
(7)Medical College of Rzeszów University, 35-959 Rzeszow, Poland.
magdafutyma@gmail.com.
(8)Academy of Physical Education in Katowice, 40-065 Katowice, Poland.
jozefopara@wp.pl.

BACKGROUND: Taking care of a child with Cerebral Palsy (CP) may be linked with
adverse effects in the parents' physical and mental health. The causes of anxiety
and depression symptoms associated with childcare are still not fully understood.
AIM: To assess the intensity of anxiety and depression symptoms in parents of
children with CP compared to a control group and to identify selected mental
health predictors.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Data were collected from 301 respondents, including 190
parents of children with CP (study group) and 111 parents taking care of children
developing normally (control group). Intensity of anxiety and depression was
rated using the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) scale. Gross Motor
Function Classification System for Cerebral Palsy (GMFCS), Sense of Coherence
Scale (SOC-29), Berlin Support Social Scales (BSSS) scales and a specially
designed questionnaire were used to assess the predictors. The investigated
variables included the children's and the parents' characteristics, as well as
environmental factors. The analyses applied Spearman's rank correlation
coefficient, M(SD) as well as multiple regression.
RESULTS: The level of anxiety and depression was clearly higher in the parents of
children with CP-the mean levels of anxiety and depression in the study group and
the controls amounted to 8.1 vs. 4.7 and 6.8 vs. 3.7, respectively. The factors
associated with intensity of anxiety and depression in the parents of children
with CP included lack of social support, mainly perceived and received support,
unsatisfying parental health status, poor economic status of the family, as well 
as difficult living conditions, sense of coherence, loneliness, the parent's
gender, and the child's intellectual disability.
CONCLUSIONS: Identification of significant anxiety and depression predictors,
understood as modifiable factors, should be considered in determining and
planning comprehensive support for a child with CP and his/her primary parental
caregiver.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph16214173 
PMCID: PMC6862674
PMID: 31671833  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. JMIR Res Protoc. 2019 Oct 30;8(10):e15303. doi: 10.2196/15303.

A Salutogenic Approach to Understanding the Potential of Green Programs for the
Rehabilitation of Young Employees With Burnout: Protocol for a Mixed Method Study
on Effectiveness and Effective Elements.

Pijpker R(1), Vaandrager L(1), Veen EJ(2), Koelen MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Health and Society, Department of Social Sciences, Wageningen University,
Wageningen, Netherlands.
(2)Rural Sociology, Department of Social Sciences, Wageningen University,
Wageningen, Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Burnout is the leading cause of absenteeism in the Netherlands, with 
associated sick leave costs amounting to around €1.8 billion. Studies have
indicated that burnout complaints increased from almost 14.4% in 2014 to 17.3% in
2018, especially among employees between the ages of 18 and 35 years, and further
increases are expected. Although there are many published articles on burnout,
not much is known about what constitutes effective rehabilitation (ie, the
reduction of burnout complaints and the facilitation of returning to work). At
the same time, multiple pilot studies have indicated that green programs are
effective in both reducing burnout complaints and facilitating return to work.
Green programs have been developed by professionals experienced in using the
natural environment to facilitate rehabilitation (eg, through green exercise and 
healing gardens). The literature nevertheless lacks comprehensive and contextual 
insight into what works and why.
OBJECTIVE: The overarching aim of this study is to explore the potential of green
programs for young employees with burnout. We present the study protocol from an 
ongoing research project consisting of 2 phases, each composed of 2 research
objectives that sequentially build upon each other.
METHODS: The study is based on a sequential design with 4 research objectives,
using both qualitative and quantitative research methods. In the first phase, a
systematic literature review (research objective 1) and in-depth interviews
(research objective 2) will be used to explore mechanisms underlying the
rehabilitation of young employees with burnout. In the second phase, a multicase 
study will be conducted to examine the extent to which green programs are built
on mechanisms identified in the first phase (research objective 3). By employing 
a pretest and posttest design, a specific green program that captures most of
those mechanisms will then be evaluated on its effect and process with regard to 
the rehabilitation of young employees with burnout (research objective 4). The
project started in June 2018 and will continue through June 2022.
RESULTS: The first phase (research objectives 1 and 2) is intended to generate
information on the mechanisms underlying the rehabilitation of young employees
with burnout. The second phase (research objectives 3 and 4) is designed to
demonstrate the extent to which and how the selected green program facilitates
the rehabilitation of young employees with burnout.
CONCLUSIONS: Understanding how green programs can facilitate the rehabilitation
of young employees with burnout complaints can help to address this societal
issue.
INTERNATIONAL REGISTERED REPORT IDENTIFIER (IRRID): DERR1-10.2196/15303.

©Roald Pijpker, Lenneke Vaandrager, Esther J Veen, Maria A Koelen. Originally
published in JMIR Research Protocols (http://www.researchprotocols.org),
30.10.2019.

DOI: 10.2196/15303 
PMCID: PMC6913693
PMID: 31670699 


20. Psychooncology. 2020 Jan;29(1):107-113. doi: 10.1002/pon.5243. Epub 2019 Oct 31.

Sense of coherence and health-related quality of life in patients with
neurotoxicity after cancer chemotherapy: Assessment from a real-time mobile
phone-based system.

Drott J(1)(2), Fomichov V(3), Börjeson S(4)(2), Berterö C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(2)Division of Nursing Science, Department of Medical and Health Sciences,
Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(3)Centre for Organisational Support and Development County Council of
Östergötland, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(4)Department of Oncology, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: In the present study, we aimed to assess sense of coherence (SOC) and 
health-related quality of life (HRQOL) during and after adjuvant chemotherapy by 
mobile phone-based reporting in patients with colorectal cancer experiencing
neurotoxicity.
METHODS: In this prospective descriptive cohort study, a mobile phone-based
system was used to receive a series of real-time longitudinal patient-reported
assessments of SOC (13-item), HRQOL (Functional Assessment of Cancer
Therapy-General (FACT-G) 27-item), and neurotoxicity (OANQ 29-item) from 43
patients with colorectal cancer after being treated with chemotherapy including
oxaliplatin. Measurements were conducted during the whole treatment period (mean 
5 cycles) and up to 12 months after completing chemotherapy.
RESULTS: In total, 817 questionnaire responses (226 SOC, 221 FACT-G, 370 OANQ)
answered during and after chemotherapy treatment were available for analysis.
Even though all patients experienced neurotoxicity during the treatment period,
HRQOL was stable over time. Over time, the ratings of physical wellbeing tended
to increase, while the subscale of social wellbeing tended to decrease. Overall
SOC, including the three components comprehensibility, manageability, and
meaningfulness was stable during the entire study period. No internal data was
missing due to the mobile phone-based system.
CONCLUSIONS: All patients had neurotoxicity during the treatment period that
seemed to affect the social wellbeing component of HRQOL, but SOC seemed
unaffected. Real-time patient-reported assessment using mobile phone technology
could be valuable in the clinical setting to provide continuous individualised
monitoring to help identify patients who need further evaluation to maintain or
improve their psychosocial health.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pon.5243 
PMID: 31670431  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Braz Oral Res. 2019 Oct 28;33:e100. doi: 10.1590/1807-3107bor-2019.vol33.0100.
eCollection 2019.

Impact of sense of coherence on oral health-related quality of life among
Brazilian adults.

Silva ESD(1), Possobon RF(1), Barbosa MDM(2), Batista MJ(3), Tenuta LMA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade de Campinas - UNICAMP, Piracicaba Dental School, Department of
Community Dentistry, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil.
(2)Universidade de Campinas - UNICAMP, Piracicaba Dental School, Department of
Prosthodontics and Periodontics, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil.
(3)Faculdade de Medicina de Jundiaí, Department of Community Health, Jundiaí, SP,
Brazil.
(4)University of Michigan, School of Dentistry, Department of Cariology,
Restorative Sciences and Endodontics, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

It has been postulated that oral health-related quality of life (OHRQoL) may be
affected by the sense of coherence (SOC), but there are no epidemiological
studies investigating this association in Brazilian adults. The present study was
conducted among adults of a mid-sized Brazilian city, with the aim of looking
into this association. The probability sampling consisted of 342 adults aged
35-44 years old, from a mid-sized Brazilian city, who were examined at their
homes for caries (Decayed, Missing and Filled Teeth [DMFT] Index) and periodontal
disease (Community Periodontal Index - CPI), according to WHO criteria. The
questionnaire applied included demographic factors, socioeconomic information,
use of dental services, behavior, SOC and the Oral Health Impact Profile (OHIP). 
The OHIP outcome, measured by prevalence of the impact, was analyzed by binary
logistic regression using a hierarchical approach, a conceptual model, and a 5%
significance level. A total of 67.9% of the respondents had one or more impacts
on OHRQoL, and 54.4% showed a high SOC. The impact on OHRQoL was more prevalent
in adults who had a manual occupation (PR = 2.47, 95%CI 1.24-4.93), those who
perceived the need for dental treatment (PR = 2.93, 95%CI 1.67-5.14), and those
who had untreated caries (PR = 1.93, 95%CI 1.07-3.47). Those with a low SOC had a
twofold higher prevalence of impact on OHRQoL (PR = 2.19, 95%CI 1.29-3.71). This 
impact on OHRQoL was associated with a low SOC, even after adjusted by
socioeconomic, behavioral and clinical factors. Future studies should consider
the SOC in determining the oral health impact on quality of life.

DOI: 10.1590/1807-3107bor-2019.vol33.0100 
PMID: 31664362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Q J Exp Psychol (Hove). 2020 Apr;73(4):568-577. doi: 10.1177/1747021819888066.
Epub 2019 Nov 22.

Feeling free: External influences on endogenous behaviour.

Charles L(1), Haggard P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, London, UK.

When we are presented with two equally appealing options, how does the brain
break the symmetry between them and make a choice? Recent research has proposed
that when no clear information can guide decisions, we use irrelevant noise to
tip the scale in favour of one alternative and decide how to act. In the present 
study, we investigated this issue exploring how human decisions were influenced
by noise in a visual signal that cued instructed or free choice. Participants
were presented with random-dot kinematograms, moving unidirectionally either
upwards or downwards (in instructed trials) or both upwards and downwards
simultaneously (free-choice trials). By varying the coherence of dot motion, we
were able to test how moment-to-moment fluctuations in motion energy could
influence action selection processes. We also measured participants' awareness of
such influence. Our results revealed three novel findings: Participants' choices 
tended to follow fluctuations in dot motion, showing that sensory noise biased
"free" selection between actions, irrespective of the clarity of the free cue.
However, participants appeared to remain unaware of that influence, because
subjective ratings of freedom did not correlate with the degree of sensory
biasing. In one exception to this general rule, we found that, when participants 
resisted the bias and made a choice opposite to the one suggested by the
stimulus, they reported strong subjective sense of having chosen independently of
the stimulation. This result suggests that inhibitory control is tightly linked
to the sense of freedom of choice.

DOI: 10.1177/1747021819888066 
PMID: 31662035  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Nurs Open. 2019 Jul 29;6(4):1414-1423. doi: 10.1002/nop2.338. eCollection 2019
Oct.

Affective organizational commitment among nursing home employees: A longitudinal 
study on the influence of a health-promoting work environment.

Grødal K(1)(2), Innstrand ST(1)(2), Haugan G(1)(2), André B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Nursing, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Science NTNU - Norwegian University of Science and Technology Trondheim Norway.
(2)NTNU Center for Health Promotion Research Trondheim Norway.

Aim: To investigate whether affective organizational commitment (AOC) among
nursing home employees is enhanced by a health-promoting work environment,
conceptualized as high levels of job resources, work-related sense of coherence
(work-SOC) and low levels of job demands.
Design: This study used a longitudinal design. Survey data were collected with a 
1-year interval between 2015/2016-2016/2017 among nursing home employees in
Norway.
Methods: Structural equation modelling was used to analyse the longitudinal data 
(N = 166) and cross-sectional data from the first time point (N = 558).
Results: The results supported that work-SOC was strongly and positively related 
to AOC. Job resources and job demands were positively and negatively related,
respectively, to work-SOC but were not related to future AOC. The indirect
effects of autonomy and supervisor support on AOC, via work-SOC, were
significant. The indirect effects regarding social community at work, emotional
demands and role conflict were unclear.

© 2019 The Authors. Nursing Open published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/nop2.338 
PMCID: PMC6805324
PMID: 31660169 

Conflict of interest statement: We have no conflict of interest to declare.


24. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2019 Oct 25;93. pii: e201910076.

[The rural health physician and the promotion of health: perspectives from
Andalusia].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Barranco Tirado JF(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Médico de Familia y Comunitaria del Centro de Salud de Santiago de la Espada. 
Jaén. España.
(2)Miembro del Grupo de Trabajo en Medicina Rural de la Sociedad Andaluza de
Medicina de Familia y Comunitaria (SAMFyC). Granada. España.

The rural environment is eminently diverse and complex, and the concept of
rurality is controversial and contentious depending on the countries and the
context. However, there is a set of global dynamics that affect rural enclaves
and their social organization, as well as the social determinants on which much
of the health of their inhabitants depends. The family doctor in rural areas is
in a strategic position thanks to the knowledge of her or his territory and
community, and her or his close relation to it that is needed to carry out a
contextual analysis of these external influences on the functioning of the
community, on the conditions and lifestyles that affect the people in the
community. In addition, rural medicine as a professional setting for the
promotion of health, has a mobilizing instrument, the social capital that the
rural doctor is able to accumulate to a greater extent than in an urban
environment, in order to carry out empowering and salutogenic participatory-based
community actions and to advocate for health. Likewise, the family doctor and the
provision of health services are key pieces in the process of healing, assisting 
and caring for the development and support of rural enclaves, in order to
maintain the habitability of these communities and to effectively exercise the
right to equitable health services.

Publisher: El ámbito rural es eminentemente diverso y complejo. El mismo concepto
de ruralidad es polémico y contencioso, según los países y el contexto. Sin
embargo, existe un conjunto de dinámicas globales que afectan a los enclaves
rurales y a su organización social, y también a los determinantes sociales de los
que depende gran parte de la salud de sus habitantes. El médico de familia rural 
se encuentra en una situación estratégica, gracias al conocimiento del territorio
y su comunidad, así como a las relaciones que mantiene con ésta para realizar un 
análisis centrado en estas influencias externas sobre el funcionamiento de la
comunidad y sobre las condiciones y estilos de vida que afectan a las personas de
un territorio. Además, la medicina rural como escenario profesional para la
promoción de la salud cuenta con un instrumento movilizador. Éste sería el
capital social que el médico rural sea capaz de acumular en mayor medida que en
el medio urbano, para así llevar a cabo acciones comunitarias participativas
(basadas en activos para la salud) empoderadoras y salutogénicas, y también para 
ejercer como advocate o compromisario por la salud. Así mismo, el médico de
familia y la provisión de servicios sanitarios son piezas clave para sanar,
asistir y cuidar, así como para el desarrollo y sostenimiento de los enclaves
rurales, para mantener la habitabilidad de estos lugares y para el ejercicio
efectivo del derecho a la salud en términos de igualdad territorial.

PMID: 31649235  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019 Oct 18;16(20). pii: E3990. doi:
10.3390/ijerph16203990.

Women in Refugee Camps: Which Coping Resources Help Them to Adapt?

Braun-Lewensohn O(1), Abu-Kaf S(2), Al-Said K(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Conflict Management and Resolution Program, Department of Multidisciplinary
Studies, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba 8410501, Israel.
ornabl@bgu.ac.il.
(2)Conflict Management and Resolution Program, Department of Multidisciplinary
Studies, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba 8410501, Israel.
aks@bgu.ac.il.
(3)Conflict Management and Resolution Program, Department of Multidisciplinary
Studies, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba 8410501, Israel.
haled70@gmail.com.
(4)Kay Academic College of Education, Beersheba 84536, Israel. haled70@gmail.com.

: The present study aimed to explore the coping resources and mental health of
women who have fled Syria to a neighboring European country. To that end, we
examined the roles of sociodemographic factors, situational factors, and personal
and community sense of coherence (SOC and ComSOC, respectively) in mental-health 
outcomes. One hundred and eleven refugee women aged 19-70 filled out
self-reported questionnaires during August 2018 in a refugee camp in Greece. The 
questionnaires asked the participants for demographic information (i.e., age,
level of education level, and time spent in the camp) and also addressed the
situational factors of having received aid from various organizations, appraisal 
of danger during the war in Syria, and exposure to war experiences, as well as
the coping resources of SOC and ComSOC. The results show that time spent in the
camp, appraisal of danger, SOC, and ComSOC all play significant roles in
predicting the variance of various mental-health outcomes. Together, those
factors predict 56% of anxiety, 53% of depression, and 58% of somatization. SOC
was also found to mediate the relationships between time spent in the camp and
outcome variables, as well as the relationships between the appraisal of danger
and the outcome variables. This indicates that SOC is crucial for good
adaptation. These results will be discussed in light of the salutogenic theory.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph16203990 
PMCID: PMC6843964
PMID: 31635399  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Eur J Oncol Nurs. 2019 Dec;43:101671. doi: 10.1016/j.ejon.2019.09.012. Epub 2019 
Oct 9.

Experiences of psychological flow as described by people diagnosed with and
treated for head and neck cancer.

Björklund M(1), Fridlund B(2), Mårtensson J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, School of Health and Welfare, Jönköping University,
SE-551 11, Jönköping, Sweden. Electronic address: margerethb@gmail.com.
(2)CICE, Linnaeus University, SE-351 95, Växjö, Sweden.
(3)Department of Nursing, School of Health and Welfare, Jönköping University,
SE-551 11, Jönköping, Sweden.

PURPOSE: To describe flow as experienced by people diagnosed with and treated for
head and neck cancer.
METHOD: A descriptive design based on a deductive qualitative content analysis
was used to explain Csikszentmihalyi's flow theory from the perspective of people
living with head and neck cancer. Interviews were conducted with seven
participants diagnosed with and treated for different forms and stages of head
and neck cancer.
RESULTS: Experiences of flow were associated with people's interests, skill
levels and actions involving and creating both happiness and the feeling of
something worth living for. Optimal flow was a state of consciousness in which
mind and body work together, and the people were completely absorbed in an
activity related to nature, hobbies or family. Microflow occurred as part of
everyday life, relieving stress and anxiety and helping them to focus on their
daily routines. This included humming, listening to the radio or watching TV.
CONCLUSIONS: The people's inner strength and desire to feel better made flow
possible, and they used unknown skills that enhanced self-satisfaction. Managing 
self-care activities increased feelings of control, participation and enjoyment. 
This calls for person-centred care with a salutogenic approach based on the
people's own interests, skill levels and actions; what makes the person feel
happy.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejon.2019.09.012 
PMID: 31622871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Front Psychol. 2019 Sep 13;10:2117. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02117. eCollection
2019.

An Event-Related Potential Study of the Neural Response to Inferred Motion in
Visual Images of Varying Coherence.

Jia L(1), Xu Y(1), Sweeney JA(2), Wang C(1), Sung B(3), Wang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, China.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, United States.
(3)School of Marketing, Curtin University, Perth, WA, Australia.

A vivid sense of motion can be inferred from static pictures of objects in
motion. Like perception of real motion (RM), viewing photographs with implied
motion (IM) can also activate the motion-sensitive visual cortex, including the
middle temporal complex (hMT+) of the human extrastriate cortex. Moreover,
extrastriate cortical activity also increases with motion coherence. Based on
these previous findings, this study examined whether similar coherence
level-dependent activity in motion-sensitive human extrastriate cortex is seen
with IM stimuli of varying coherence. Photographic stimuli showing a human moving
in four directions (left, right, toward, or away from the viewer) were presented 
to 15 participants. The coherence of the stimuli was manipulated by changing the 
percentage of pictures implying movement in one direction.
Electroencephalographic data were collected while participants viewed IM or
counterpart non-IM stimuli. The P2 response of extrastriate visual cortex (source
located at hMT+) increased bilaterally with coherence level in the IM conditions 
but not in the non-IM conditions. This finding demonstrates that extrastriate
visual cortical responses are progressively activated as motion coherence
increases, even when motion is inferred, providing new support for the view that 
the activity of human motion-sensitive extrastriate visual cortex can be
modulated by top-down perceptual influences in addition to its well-established
role in processing bottom-up sensory signals.

Copyright © 2019 Jia, Xu, Sweeney, Wang, Sung and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02117 
PMCID: PMC6760095
PMID: 31620054 


28. Front Psychol. 2019 Sep 20;10:2061. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02061. eCollection
2019.

Hope and Fulfillment After Complex Trauma: Using Mixed Methods to Understand
Healing.

Saint Arnault D(1), Sinko L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Behavior and Biological Sciences, University of Michigan 
School of Nursing, Ann Arbor, MI, United States.

Research has shown that the experience of Childhood Sexual Abuse (CSA) can
increase the rates of physical and emotional sequela, including depression,
anxiety, PTSD, and physical pain. However, little is known about the healing
journeys for those women who, after surviving CSA, also experience unwanted
sexual experiences (USE) as a young adult. The goal of this mixed method study is
to compare identity, distress, and positive health outcomes for survivors of CSA 
and USE with those of women who have survived USE alone. First, 206 women
completed a survey that evaluated mental health distress, trauma centrality, and 
health indicators, and these women were invited to take part in an additional
interview. A subsample of 24 women agreed to be interviewed with a narrative
interview that examined trauma recovery from a holistic perspective. Thematic
analysis of the interview data revealed contextual and internal barriers and
facilitators of healing. Eight qualitative dimensions were derived from code
frequencies of the emerging 50 qualitative codes, including Normalization,
Denial, Negative Impact, Positive Coping, Rumination, Identity Healing, Hope, and
Fulfillment Healing, and Engagement Healing. We then used t-tests to compare the 
mean code frequencies of these code complexes for survivors of CSA/USE and USE
alone, and the significant findings revealed hypotheses to be tested in the
larger quantitative sample. H1: Survivors of CSA will have less denial than USE
alone; H2: Survivors of CSA will have higher Negative Impact scores than USE
alone, and H3: Survivors of CSA will have more Hope and Fulfillment than USE
alone. H1 was supported; survivors of both CSA and USE had a significantly higher
mean Centrality Scores than Survivors of USE alone. H2 was supported, and all
negative impact scores were significantly higher for the survivors of both CSA
and USE than survivors of USE alone. H3 was partially supported. Survivors of
both CSA and USE had significantly higher mean Post-Traumatic growth scores.
However, survivors of USE alone had significantly higher means for Sense of
Coherence and Self-Compassion scores. Implications for practice are discussed.

Copyright © 2019 Saint Arnault and Sinko.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02061 
PMCID: PMC6764148
PMID: 31616333 


29. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2019 Oct 10;19(1):345. doi: 10.1186/s12884-019-2505-2.

A qualitative cross-cultural analysis of NICU care culture and infant feeding in 
Finland and the U.S.

Holdren S(1), Fair C(2), Lehtonen L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland.
sholdren@elon.edu.
(2)Public Health Studies & Department Chair, Elon University Department of Public
Health Studies, Elon, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Neonatology & Professor of Pediatrics, Turku
University Hospital, Turku, Finland.

BACKGROUND: The benefits of family-centered care for the health and well-being of
preterm infants and their families include increased parent-infant closeness,
improved lactation, and positive mental health outcomes; however, it is known
that the extent to which family-centered care is adopted varies by unit. This
study aimed to understand how differences in neonatal care culture in two units
in Finland and the U.S. were translated to parents' infant feeding experiences in
the hope of improving relationally focused feeding practices in both locations.
METHODS: This qualitative, cross-sectional study utilized narrative methodologies
to understand the lived experiences of 15 families hospitalized in a tertiary
neonatal intensive care unit in Finland (n = 8) and the U. S (n = 7).
RESULTS: A global theme of lactation as a means or an end showed that lactation
and infant feeding were framed differently in each location. The three supporting
themes that explain families' perceptions of their transition to parenthood,
support as a family unit, and experience with lactation include: universal early 
postnatal challenges; culture and space-dependent nursing support; and controlled
or empowering breastfeeding experiences.
CONCLUSIONS: Care culture plays a large role in framing all infant caring
activities, including lactation and infant feeding. This study found that in the 
unit in Finland, breastfeeding was one method to achieve closeness with an
infant, while in the unit in the U.S., pumping was only an end to promote infant 
nutritional health. Therefore, breastfeeding coupled with closeness was found to 
be supportive of a salutogenic, or health-promoting, care approach for the whole 
family.

DOI: 10.1186/s12884-019-2505-2 
PMCID: PMC6785867
PMID: 31601193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019 Oct 9;16(20). pii: E3800. doi:
10.3390/ijerph16203800.

Association between Sense of Coherence Associated with Mental Health in
Caregivers of Older Adults.

López-Martínez C(1), Serrano-Ortega N(2), Moreno-Cámara S(3), Del-Pino-Casado
R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Jaén, 23071
Jáen, Spain. cmartine@ujaen.es.
(2)Surgical nursing, Reina Sofia University Hospital, 14004 Córdoba, Spain.
nataliaserrano@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Jaén, 23071
Jáen, Spain. smcamara@ujaen.es.
(4)Department of Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Jaén, 23071
Jáen, Spain. rdelpino@ujaen.es.

The purpose of this study was to analyze association between sense of coherence
and perceived burden, anxiety, depression, and quality of life in caregivers of
older adults. A cross-sectional study was carried out with a probabilistic sample
of 132 caregivers of older relatives from the regions of Jaén, Spain. The
measures assessed were sense of coherence (Life Orientation Questionnaire),
subjective burden (Caregiver Strain Index of Robinson), anxiety and depression
(Goldberg Scale), and quality of life (Health Questionnaire SF-12). The main
analyses included bivariate analysis using Pearson's correlation coefficient and 
multivariate analysis through canonical correlation analysis. Our findings show
that the sense of coherence explained 50.8% of the variance shared between
subjective burden, anxiety, depression, and quality of life. We highlighted
manageability as the variable within the dimensions of the sense of coherence
with the greatest participation in the model. The sense of coherence may be an
important protective factor for the mental health of the caregiver of dependent
elderly relatives.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph16203800 
PMCID: PMC6843852
PMID: 31601018  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


31. J Community Psychol. 2020 Mar;48(2):283-301. doi: 10.1002/jcop.22250. Epub 2019
Oct 9.

Leisure behavior and sense of coherence in the context of depression.

Nagata S(1), McCormick B(1), Piatt J(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Public Health, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennslyvania.
(2)School of Public Health, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana.

AIMS: Improved sense of coherence (SOC) can protect health among individuals with
depression. Literature suggests that leisure behavior can improve SOC, yet
empirical studies are lacking. The current study aimed to examine whether leisure
behavior was associated with SOC and depression.
METHODS: A cross-sectional online survey method was used with a sample of
community-living adults (62% female, age 18-75 years) with a self-reported
current or historical diagnosis of depression recruited from four different
depression-related populations.
RESULTS: The results of structural equation modeling found that leisure behavior 
predicted greater SOC as well as lower depressive symptoms. Greater SOC was
associated with lower perceived stress and lower depressive symptoms. The total
effect size, including both direct and indirect association between leisure
behavior and depressive symptoms was 0.452.
CONCLUSION: The findings suggested the potential benefits of leisure behavior on 
SOC and depressive symptoms.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcop.22250 
PMID: 31596968  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Hastings Cent Rep. 2019 Sep;49(5):6-7. doi: 10.1002/hast.1044.

Admiring Dan's Creation.

Parens E.

Dan Callahan never tired of probing the fundamental ethical question that
Socrates asked, "How should we live?" The investigation animated him. He asked,
Can we, for a moment, set aside our preoccupation with better health and a longer
life and think together about what we want those things for ? Can we explore what
a good life consists in? It turned out there was no better alibi for asking that 
fundamental question than taking up the seemingly more manageable ones that were 
arising in the context of emerging medicine, science, and technology. When one
asked about who should be born, or how we should die, or how we should prioritize
investments in the myriad institutions that help to promote human well-being, the
question concerning what we mean by a good life was always and palpably present.

© 2019 The Hastings Center.

DOI: 10.1002/hast.1044 
PMID: 31581333  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Sex Med. 2019 Oct;16(10):1672-1680. doi: 10.1016/j.jsxm.2019.08.007.

Psychosocial Resources and Quality of Life in Transgender Women following
Gender-Affirming Surgery.

Breidenstein A(1), Hess J(2), Hadaschik B(2), Teufel M(3), Tagay S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. Electronic address: anja.breidenstein@uni-due.de.
(2)Department of Urology, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Psychosocial resources like social support or intrapersonal coping 
skills play an important role in resilience and quality of life (QOL), yet
research systematically investigating the availability of different resources and
QOL in transgender (trans) women is missing.
AIM: The present study aimed to systematically investigate the existence of
different psychosocial resources and QOL in trans women following
gender-affirming surgery (GAS).
METHODS: Using a cross-sectional design, 557 trans women who had received GAS at 
the local urological department were invited to study participation. Criteria for
study inclusion were 18 years and older, diagnosis of transsexualism according to
the International Classification of Disease, completion of all sessions of GAS,
and given written informed consent to study participation.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Psychosocial resources were assessed using the Essen
Resource Inventory (ERI), the Sense of Coherence Scale, and the Social Support
Scale. QOL was assessed with the Short Form Health Survey. Data from trans women 
were compared to normative data of healthy non-trans women as reported in the
respective test manuals.
RESULTS: In total, 158 trans women responded and participated in this study. They
had received GAS 4 months to 21 years ago. The total sample was divided into 3
subgroups depending on the time interval since the participants' last GAS
procedure (group 1: GAS 0.3-3 years ago (n = 48); group 2: GAS 3.1-10 years ago
(n = 62); and group 3: GAS 10.1-21 years ago (n = 41)). Trans women
retrospectively indicated their available resources 3 years ago (ERI 3-years) and
in the last 4 weeks (ERI 4-weeks). Trans women who had received GAS within the
last 3 years (group 1) showed an increase in resources when comparing ERI 3-year 
scores (presurgery) with ERI 4-week scores (postsurgery). No differences emerged 
for group 2 and group 3. Compared to normative data from non-trans women, trans
women scored significantly lower on the ERI but not in measures of Social Support
Scale or Sense of Coherence Scale. Compared to non-trans women, mental QOL was
significantly impaired in trans women, whereas no differences in physical QOL
emerged.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: As this study hints towards reduced psychosocial resources
in trans women, the offering of specialized counseling can have high beneficial
potential to support the development of resources, thereby enhancing QOL.
STRENGTH & LIMITATIONS: Data of a large sample of trans women is provided who
were investigated up to 21 years after GAS. The study is limited by its
cross-sectional design and the response rate of 42%.
CONCLUSION: This study indicates that psychosocial resources improve around the
time of GAS and seem to be improved and sustained in later years following GAS.
Still, compared to non-trans women, trans women have a lower availability of
resources and a lower mental QOL. Breidenstein A, Hess J, Hadaschik B, et al.
Psychosocial Resources and Quality of Life in Transgender Women following
Gender-Affirming Surgery. J Sex Med 2019;16:1672-1680.

Copyright © 2019 International Society for Sexual Medicine. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsxm.2019.08.007 
PMID: 31570138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019 Sep 29;16(19). pii: E3664. doi:
10.3390/ijerph16193664.

And in the Middle of My Chaos There Was You?-Dog Companionship and Its Impact on 
the Assessment of Stressful Situations.

Krouzecky C(1)(2), Emmett L(3)(4), Klaps A(5)(6), Aden J(7), Bunina A(8), Stetina
BU(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Psychological Outpatient Clinic, Sigmund Freud University Vienna, 1020 Wien,
Austria. christine.krouzecky@sfu.ac.at.
(2)Faculty of Psychology, Sigmund Freud University Vienna, 1020 Wien, Austria.
christine.krouzecky@sfu.ac.at.
(3)Psychological Outpatient Clinic, Sigmund Freud University Vienna, 1020 Wien,
Austria. lisa.emmett@sfu.ac.at.
(4)Faculty of Psychology, Sigmund Freud University Vienna, 1020 Wien, Austria.
lisa.emmett@sfu.ac.at.
(5)Psychological Outpatient Clinic, Sigmund Freud University Vienna, 1020 Wien,
Austria. armin.klaps@sfu.ac.at.
(6)Faculty of Psychology, Sigmund Freud University Vienna, 1020 Wien, Austria.
armin.klaps@sfu.ac.at.
(7)Faculty of Psychology, Sigmund Freud University Vienna, 1020 Wien, Austria.
jan.aden@sfu.ac.at.
(8)Faculty of Psychology, Sigmund Freud University Vienna, 1020 Wien, Austria.
anastasiya.bunina@sfu.ac.at.
(9)Psychological Outpatient Clinic, Sigmund Freud University Vienna, 1020 Wien,
Austria. birgit.u.stetina@sfu.ac.at.
(10)Faculty of Psychology, Sigmund Freud University Vienna, 1020 Wien, Austria.
birgit.u.stetina@sfu.ac.at.

Recent studies show evidence that human-dog companionship has healthy effects on 
humans. For example, findings demonstrate that owning a dog leads to a reduction 
in stress levels. Aspects that have not been taken into consideration so far are 
underlying theoretical principles of stress like the sense of coherence (SOC) by 
Aaron Antonovsky. The SOC consists of psycho-social, biochemical and physical
conditions which indicate whether or not inner and outer stimuli are
comprehensive, manageable and meaningful to an individual. In addition, it is
still unclear if owning a dog affects the subjective assessment of critical life 
events (CLE), which is associated with the strength of the SOC (the stronger the 
SOC, the better the handling and assessment of stressful situations). Based on
these aspects, the goal of the study was to examine if dog ownership, as well as 
values of the SOC, have an impact on the subjective evaluation of CLE (including 
daily hassles as well as unexpected critical life events). For this purpose, dog 
owners and non-dog owners were surveyed online and were compared based on their
personal estimations regarding these constructs. Statistical analysis including
t-tests, correlations and interaction-analyses were performed and a significant
difference between dog owners and non-dog owners regarding the assessment of
daily hassles was found. Contrary to expectations, results show that dog owners
assessed daily stressors to be more stressful than non-dog owners did. Moreover, 
data show that the higher the number of stated relationships (inner- and
cross-species), the more stressful life events were assessed to be. Calculations 
showed no evidence for the influence of dogs regarding the SOC. Based on the
actual findings, it might be assumed, that an overestimation of the dog's
protective role regarding stress has taken place in public media and in research 
as well.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph16193664 
PMCID: PMC6801798
PMID: 31569522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Disabil Rehabil. 2021 Jun;43(11):1532-1541. doi: 10.1080/09638288.2019.1669224.
Epub 2019 Sep 27.

Change in sense of coherence and health-related quality of life after injury - a 
prospective cohort study.

Lindahl M(1), Juneja H(1), Teljigovic S(1), Rafn J(1), Nielsen NO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Physiotherapy, Center of Nutrition and Rehabilitation, University
College Absalon, Roskilde, Denmark.

PURPOSE: To investigate how accidents leading to fracture affect sense of
coherence and health-related quality of life 6 months later and the association
between the two phenomena.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A cohort study including 201 patients admitted to hospital
with fractures was conducted. Data were based on structured interviewing a few
days after admission and 6 months later. Sense of coherence was evaluated with a 
nine-item scale and health-related quality of life was examined with the
subscales of Short Form-36 (SF-36).
RESULTS: Follow-up comprised 164 patients (81.6%), mean age 47 years. Sense of
coherence changed to be either stronger (43%) or weaker (41%) and was stable for 
15.9% of the participants. Health-related quality of life changed positively
after 6 months but did not reach normative values. Strong sense of coherence was 
significantly associated with the SF-36 subscales emotional role functioning,
social functioning, vitality, and mental health.
CONCLUSIONS: Accidents leading to fracture can be stressful life events that
could influence an individual's sense of coherence to be stronger or weaker. The 
association between sense of coherence and health-related quality of life
emphasises the importance of therapists supporting the patients' personal
resources and promote a salutogenic focus.IMPLICATIONS FOR REHABILITATIONAn
injury may change an individual's sense of coherence to be stronger or weaker.For
patients who sustain fracture, sense of coherence should be included in
therapists' analysis of personal resources and support a salutogenic
perspective.Health-related quality of life is especially for younger individuals 
affected by an accident and its consequences and need a guided and meticulous
rehabilitation course.

DOI: 10.1080/09638288.2019.1669224 
PMID: 31560231 


36. Aging Ment Health. 2020 Oct;24(10):1717-1725. doi: 10.1080/13607863.2019.1667297.
Epub 2019 Sep 27.

Antonovsky's sense of coherence and resistance resources reduce perception of
burden in family carers of people with Alzheimer's disease.

Turró-Garriga O(1)(2), Conde-Sala JL(1)(3), Viñas V(3), Turon-Estrada A(2),
Cullell-Juncà M(4), Calvó-Perxas L(1), Juvinyà-Canal D(5), Mioshi E(6),
Garre-Olmo J(1)(2)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Aging, Disability and Health Research Group, Girona's Biomedical Research
Institute (IdIBGI), Salt, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Registry of Dementias of Girona, Catalan Health System, Girona, Catalonia,
Spain.
(3)Faculty of Psychology, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(4)Fundació Salut Empordà, Figueres, Catalonia, Spain.
(5)Health Promotion, University of Girona, Girona, Catalonia, Spain.
(6)School of Health Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Girona, Girona, Catalonia,
Spain.

Objectives: Taking care of people with dementia (PWD) has been associated with
some degree of burden. The variability of the carer's burden can be partially
explained by their personal characteristics. Antonovsky's model of health defined
the resistance resources (RRs) as essential mechanisms to cope with stressors,
and to shape the personal sense of coherence (SOC). This study identifies the RRs
related with carer's SOC, and their implications in the perception of burden in
family dementia carers.Methods: A sample of 308 participants from the 'SOC & DEM 
study' (154 carers and 154 PWD) was recruited from two memory clinics. Carer's
personal characteristics of burden, SOC, self-efficacy, coping strategies,
perceived social support, and depression were evaluated using standardized
instruments. PWD's degree of dependence and behaviour and psychological symptoms 
of dementia (BPSD) were assessed too. A path analysis was used to test the
relationship between caregiver burden and SOC including the personal RRs of the
carers and clinical data of PWD.Results: The path model identified SOC as a major
factor related to carer's burden perception (r = -.327). Self-efficacy (r =
.285), two coping strategies, 'use instrumental support' (r = -.235) and
'behavioural disengagement' (r = -.219), and social support perceived (r = .304) 
were the main carer's personal characteristics directly related with SOC. Caring 
experience (r = -.281) was the main carer factor related with burden while
dependence (r = .156) and BPSD (r = .157) were the dementia factors.Conclusion:
The SOC has previously related with carer's burden. The results contributed to
identify relevant and modifiable personal characteristics as RRs that could
reduce this burden.

DOI: 10.1080/13607863.2019.1667297 
PMID: 31559837  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Scand J Occup Ther. 2020 Oct;27(7):524-535. doi: 10.1080/11038128.2019.1663922.
Epub 2019 Sep 26.

From shaky grounds to solid foundations: A salutogenic perspective on return to
work after cancer.

Brusletto B(1), Ihlebæk CM(2)(3), Mjøsund NH(4), Torp S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health, Social and Welfare Studies, Faculty of Health and Social
Sciences, University of South-Eastern Norway (USN), Kongsberg, Norway.
(2)Department of Public Health Science, Faculty of Landscape and Society,
Norwegian University of Life Sciences (NMBU), Ås, Norway.
(3)Faculty of Health and Social Work Studies, Østfold University College, Halden,
Norway.
(4)Department of Mental Health Research and Development, Vestre Viken Hospital
Trust, Drammen, Norway.

Background: Almost a third of employed individuals of working age fall out of
work after cancer treatment.Aim: To explore cancer survivors' successful return
to work, focusing on assets and resources utilized to resolve cancer- and
work-related obstacles to achieve long-term employment.Methods: We interviewed
eight cancer survivors who had remained at work for at least 3 years after cancer
treatment. We performed interpretative phenomenological analysis and applied
Antonovsky's salutogenic model of health as a framework.Results: The participants
experienced uncertainty regarding cancer recurrence, impairments, and
long-lasting effects on work ability. They utilized a wide range of resistance
resources at personal, interpersonal, and social levels. Their determination to
return to work was generally strong, but the time needed to find sustainable work
and strategies to return to work varied. All participants prioritized activities 
that energized them and adapted actively to their new situation. When unsure
about outcomes, they focused on the best alternative and controlled fear
cognitively.Conclusions/Significance: Finding meaningful activities, testing
actual work ability, and focusing on the best possible outcome seemed important
to remain in work after cancer. It may be helpful to identify available resources
and utilize them to resolve tensions resulting from cancer and cancer treatment.

DOI: 10.1080/11038128.2019.1663922 
PMID: 31558078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. BMJ Open. 2019 Sep 17;9(9):e030001. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-030001.

Sense of coherence and physical health-related quality of life in Italian chronic
patients: the mediating role of the mental component.

Galletta M(1), Cherchi M(2), Cocco A(2), Lai G(2), Manca V(2), Pau M(2), Tatti
F(2), Zambon G(2), Deidda S(3), Origa P(2), Massa E(4), Cossu E(5), Boi F(6),
Contu P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health, University of Cagliari,
Cagliari, Italy maura.galletta@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health, University of Cagliari,
Cagliari, Italy.
(3)Department of Surgical Sciences, Colorectal Surgery Unit, University of
Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(4)Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health, Medical Oncology Unit,
University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(5)Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health, Endocrinology and Diabetes
Unit, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(6)Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health, Endocrinology Unit,
University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the relationship between sense of coherence (SOC) and
physical health-related quality of life in patients with chronic illnesses by
focusing on the mediating role of the mental component of quality of life.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional survey design.
SETTING: Secondary care; three departments of an Italian university hospital.
METHODS: The participants (n=209) in the study were adult (≥18 years) outpatients
with a chronic pathology (eg, diabetes, thyroid disorders or cancer) at any phase
in the care trajectory (eg, pre-treatment, undergoing treatment, follow-up care).
They agreed to participate in the study after providing their informed consent.
Data were collected using a structured self-reporting questionnaire. Data
analysis was carried out using SPSS, and mediation analysis was performed via
PROCESS macro.
RESULTS: The SOC score of the study sample was equivalent to that of the general 
population (mean difference=-2.50, 95% CI -4.57 to 0.00). Correlation analysis
showed that SOC was mainly correlated to the mental component (MCS) (r=0.51,
p<0.01) of quality of life and then to the physical component (PCS) (r=0.35,
p<0.01). Mediation analysis showed that SOC was directly related to MCS (p<0.001,
95% CI 0.62 to 0.99) but not to PCS (p=0.42, 95% CI -0.27 to 0.12). In turn, MCS 
was directly related to PCS (p<0.001, 95% CI 0.76 to 1.01). The indirect effect
of SOC on PCS through MCS was significant (0.71, p<0.001, bootstrap 95% CI 0.54
to 0.91), thus supporting the mediating role of the mental component of quality
of life.
CONCLUSION: The indirect effect suggests that SOC is a marker of quality of life,
especially of the mental component. The findings show that SOC is a psychological
process that impacts patients' mental health status, which in turn affects
physical health. Better knowledge of a person's SOC and how it affects his/her
quality of life may help to plan tailoring interventions to strengthen SOC and
improve health-related quality of life.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-030001 
PMCID: PMC6756344
PMID: 31530606  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


39. Cardiol Young. 2019 Nov;29(11):1328-1334. doi: 10.1017/S1047951119001781. Epub
2019 Sep 16.

Parental reactions, distress, and sense of coherence after prenatal versus
postnatal diagnosis of complex congenital heart disease.

Bratt EL(1)(2), Järvholm S(3), Ekman-Joelsson BM(2), Johannsmeyer A(4), Carlsson 
SÅ(5), Mattsson LÅ(3), Mellander M(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health and Care Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, The Queen Silvia Children's Hospital,
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital,
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Södra Älvsborgs Hospital, Borås,
Sweden.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Norra Älvsborg Hospital, Trollhättan,
Sweden.
(6)Institute of Clinical Sciences, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

INTRODUCTION: A diagnosis of congenital heart disease (CHD) in offspring triggers
psychological distress in parents. Results of previous studies have been
inconsistent regarding the psychological impact of a prenatal versus a postnatal 
diagnosis. The aim of this study was to evaluate the influence of the time of
diagnosis on levels of parental distress.
METHODS: Pregnant women and their partners with a fetus diagnosed with complex
CHD, parents of children with postnatally diagnosed CHD, and pregnant women and
their partners with uncomplicated pregnancies were invited to participate. Data
were collected during pregnancy and 2-6 months after delivery using the Hospital 
Anxiety and Depression Scale, sense of coherence, life satisfaction, and Dyadic
Adjustment Scale.
RESULTS: During pregnancy, the prenatal group scored lower sense of coherence
compared to controls (p=0.044). Postnatally the prenatal group scored lower on
sense of coherence compared to the postnatal group and controls (p=0.001;
p=0.001). Postnatally, the prenatal and postnatal groups had higher levels of
anxiety compared to controls (p=0.025; p=0.0003). Life satisfaction was lower in 
the prenatal group compared to that in the postnatal group and in controls
(p=0.000; p=0.0004).
CONCLUSION: Parents with a prenatal diagnosis of CHD in offspring report a low
sense of coherence already during pregnancy which decreased further at follow-up.
The same group reported a lower satisfaction with life compared to parents of a
child with postnatal diagnosis of CHD and parents of a healthy child. This
motivates further efforts to improve counselling and support during pregnancy and
for parents after a prenatal diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1017/S1047951119001781 
PMID: 31522698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Exp Dermatol. 2019 Nov;28(11):1321-1327. doi: 10.1111/exd.14037. Epub 2019 Oct
29.

The influence of MC1R on dermal morphological features of photo-exposed skin in
women revealed by reflectance confocal microscopy and optical coherence
tomography.

Guida S(1), Ciardo S(1), De Pace B(1), De Carvalho N(1), Peccerillo F(1),
Manfredini M(1), Farnetani F(1), Chester J(1), Kaleci S(1), Manganelli M(2),
Guida G(2), Pellacani G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology Unit, Department of Surgical, Medical, Dental and Morphological
Science with Interest Transplant, Oncological and Regenerative Medicine,
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(2)Molecular Biology Section, Department of Basic Medical Sciences Neurosciences 
and Sense Organs, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R) gene is one of the major
determinants of skin pigmentation. It is a highly polymorphic gene and some of
its polymorphisms have been related to specific skin phenotypes, increased risk
of skin cancers and skin photoageing. Currently, its contribution to changes in
dermal features in photo-exposed skin is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: The main objective of this study is to evaluate the potential
correlation between MC1R status and specific healthy photo-exposed skin
characteristics.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Skin facial features were estimated by evaluation with
standard digital photography with automated features count, reflectance confocal 
microscopy (RCM) and optical coherence tomography (OCT) in 100 healthy women.
Skin of the forearms was used as a control.
RESULTS: The study found an association between RHC MC1R polymorphisms and dermal
features in photo-exposed areas being represented by increased vessel density and
pixel density in OCT (P = .025 and P = .001, respectively) and increased coarse
collagen in RCM (P = .034), as compared to non-RHC subjects. To our knowledge
this is previously unreported. Additionally, previously reported correlations
between light hair colour and pigmented spots with MC1R RHC polymorphisms have
been confirmed.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest the role of RHC MC1R variants in dermal
variations of facial skin, as compared to non-RHC variants. To our knowledge this
is previously unreported.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/exd.14037 
PMID: 31520496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Acta Odontol Scand. 2020 Jan;78(1):74-80. doi: 10.1080/00016357.2019.1661512.
Epub 2019 Sep 12.

Orofacial pain and its relationship with oral health-related quality of life and 
psychological distress in middle-aged women.

Bäck K(1), Hakeberg M(1), Wide U(1), Hange D(2), Dahlström L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Behavioral and Community Dentistry, Institute of Odontology, The
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Public Health and Community Medicine/Primary Health Care, The
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden.

Objective: To investigate the relationship between subjective symptoms of
orofacial pain and oral health-related quality of life (OHRQoL), as well as
psychological distress in population-based middle-aged women.Material and
methods: The two study samples comprised 1059 women, 38 and 50 years old, in
representative cross-sectional studies. Women with long-lasting, frequent pain or
headaches, related to temporomandibular disorders (TMD), with moderate-to-high
estimates were analysed in relation to the non-case group. OHRQoL was measured
using the Oral Health Impact Profile (OHIP-5). Psychological distress was
measured using the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) and Sense of
Coherence (SOC-13).Results: Women with orofacial pain (n = 82, 7.7%) had a
significantly higher mean score on the OHIP-5, HADS-A and HADS-D and a lower mean
score for SOC-13. In a multivariable logistic regression, orofacial pain was
statistically significantly associated with poorer OHRQoL (OR = 1.2) and signs of
depression (HADS-D) (OR = 2.0). A higher score for SOC-13 protected from the
experience of orofacial pain (OR = 0.95).Conclusion: Orofacial pain was
associated with poorer OHRQoL and signs of psychological distress. In
interpreting the value of SOC, women with orofacial pain also appear to have a
poorer adaptive capacity.

DOI: 10.1080/00016357.2019.1661512 
PMID: 31512936  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Behav Med. 2020 Apr;43(2):185-197. doi: 10.1007/s10865-019-00097-2. Epub 2019
Sep 11.

Patient expectations for recovery after elective surgery: a common-sense model
approach.

Gehring MB(1)(2), Lerret S(2), Johnson J(1)(2), Rieder J(1)(2), Nelson D(2),
Copeland L(3), Titan A(4)(5), Hawn M(4)(5), Morris M(6)(7), Whittle J(1)(2),
Burns E(8)(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Zablocki Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
(2)Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
(3)VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System, Leeds, MA, USA.
(4)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA, 
USA.
(6)Birmingham VAMC, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(7)University of Alabama School of Medicine, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(8)Zablocki Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
eburns4@northwell.edu.
(9)Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA. eburns4@northwell.edu.
(10)Center for Health Innovations and Outcomes Research, Zucker School of
Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, 600 Community Drive, Suite 403, Manhasset, NY,
United States. eburns4@northwell.edu.

Patient perceptions of the causes of preoperative symptoms, expected impact of
surgery on symptoms and anticipated timeline of recovery are likely to affect the
risk of readmission following elective surgical procedures. However, these
perceptions have not been studied. A qualitative study was designed to explore
these perceptions, using the common-sense model of self-regulation (CSM) as the
conceptual framework. CSM is grounded in illness representations, describing how 
patients make sense of changes in physical well-being (e.g. symptoms) and develop
and assess management plans. It also establishes a broader framework for
examining patients' a priori expectations and timelines for outcomes based on
comparisons to prior experiences and underlying self-prototypes, or "Self as
Anchor". A convenience sample of 14 patients aged 56-81 who underwent elective
surgery was recruited. Semi-structured interviews informed by the CSM were
completed on the day of discharge. Content analysis with deductive coding was
used, and emerging themes were fit to components of the CSM, including the five
domains of Illness Representations-identity, cause, timeline, control, and
consequences. Two additional themes, outlook (toward the health care system,
providers and recovery efforts), and motivation (external or internal for
recovering), relate to self-prototypes, expectations for outcomes, and search for
coherence. Misattribution of symptoms, unrealistic expectations for outcomes
(e.g. expecting complete resolution of symptoms unrelated to the surgical
procedure) and timelines for recovery (unrealistically short), and the (baseline)
"normal healthy self" as distinct from the (temporarily) "sick self" were
recurrent themes. Findings suggest that patient perceptions and the actual
recovery process may be misaligned. The results underscore the importance of
assessing patients' perceptions and expectations, actively engaging patients in
their own healthcare, and providing adequate support during the transition to
home.

DOI: 10.1007/s10865-019-00097-2 
PMID: 31512105  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Palliat Support Care. 2020 Feb;18(1):24-32. doi: 10.1017/S1478951519000592.

Adaptation and psychometric evaluation of the short version of Family Sense of
Coherence Scale in a sample of persons with cancer in the palliative stage and
their family members.

Möllerberg ML(1), Årestedt K(2)(3), Sandgren A(2)(4), Benzein E(2)(4), Swahnberg 
K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Linnaeus University, Kalmar/Växjö,
Sweden.
(3)The Research Section, Region Kalmar County, Kalmar, Sweden.
(4)Center for Collaborative Palliative Care, Linnaeus University, Växjö, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: For patients' entire families, it can be challenging to live with
cancer during the palliative stage. However, a sense of coherence buffers stress 
and could help health professionals identify families that require support.
Therefore, the short version of the Family Sense of Coherence Scale (FSOC-S) was 
translated, culturally adapted, and validated in a Swedish sample.
METHODS: Translation and cross-cultural adaptation of the FSOC-S into Swedish was
conducted in accordance with the World Health Organization's Process for
Translation and Adaptation of Research Instruments guidelines. Participants were 
recruited from two oncology clinics and two palliative centers in Sweden.
RESULTS: Content validity was supported by experts (n = 7), persons with cancer
(n = 179), and family members (n = 165). Homogeneity among items was satisfactory
for persons with cancer and family members (item-total correlations were
0.45‒0.70 and 0.55‒0.72, respectively) as well as internal consistency (ordinal
alpha = 0.91 and 0.91, respectively). Factor analyses supported
unidimensionality. FSOC-S correlated (rs > 0.3) with hope, anxiety, and symptoms 
of depression, which supported convergent validity. The test-retest reliability
for items ranged between fair and good (kw = 0.37‒0.61).
SIGNIFICANCE OF RESULTS: The FSOC-S has satisfactory measurement properties to
assess family sense of coherence in persons with cancer and their family members.
FSOC-S could be used to identify family members who experience low levels of
perceived family sense of coherence which provides health care professionals with
insight into families' needs and ability to live with cancer in the palliative
stage.

DOI: 10.1017/S1478951519000592 
PMID: 31495345  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Sex Reprod Healthc. 2019 Dec;22:100456. doi: 10.1016/j.srhc.2019.100456. Epub
2019 Aug 3.

A salutary childbirth education program: Health promoting by design. A discussion
paper.

Davis D(1), Ferguson S(2), Nissen J(3), Fowler C(3), Mosslar S(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Canberra and ACT Government, Health Directorate, Australia.
Electronic address: deborah.davis@canberra.edu.au.
(2)University of Canberra, Australia.
(3)Canberra Hospital and Health Services, Australia.

Pregnancy is an ideal time to focus on health promotion. Many women and their
partners attend childbirth education classes to prepare themselves for pregnancy,
birth and parenting. However, rather than promoting health, these classes have
been criticized for preparing women and their partners for a medicalized birth,
which has become the norm in many well-resourced countries. This paper describes 
the development of a childbirth education program using the theory of
salutogenesis. While much has been written about the theory, few have attempted
to operationalize the theory for health service delivery, particularly in the
maternity care context. The aim of the program was to move individuals
participating in the program towards greater health on the health-ease/dis-ease
continuum by increasing their sense of coherence, focusing on generalized
resistance resources and strengthening the key components comprehensibility,
manageability and meaningfulness. This paper describes the development of the
program.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.srhc.2019.100456 
PMID: 31494356  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Health Psychol Open. 2019 Aug 23;6(2):2055102919871638. doi:
10.1177/2055102919871638. eCollection 2019 Jul-Dec.

The effects of sensory-processing sensitivity and sense of coherence on
depressive symptoms in university students.

Yano K(1)(2), Kase T(1), Oishi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Rikkyo University, Japan.
(2)Research Fellow of Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Japan.

Sensory-processing sensitivity differentiates individuals according to
responsivity to internal and external stimuli. It has been positively correlated 
with depressive symptoms. Meanwhile, sense of coherence, an individual's
perception that stressors are comprehensible, manageable, and meaningful for
their life, could improve depression. This cross-sectional study investigated the
moderation effect of sense of coherence on the relationship between
sensory-processing sensitivity and depressive symptoms in university students.
Japanese students (N = 430) participated in a questionnaire survey that assessed 
levels of sensory-processing sensitivity, sense of coherence, and depressive
symptoms. The results showed that a strong sense of coherence moderated the
relationship between sensory-processing sensitivity and depressive symptoms in
university students.

DOI: 10.1177/2055102919871638 
PMCID: PMC6710689
PMID: 31489201 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.


46. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019 Sep 3;16(17). pii: E3213. doi:
10.3390/ijerph16173213.

Secondary Traumatization, Psychological Stress, and Resilience in Psychosocial
Emergency Care Personnel.

Greinacher A(1), Nikendei A(2)(3), Kottke R(4), Wiesbeck J(4), Herzog W(2),
Nikendei C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Internal Medicine and Psychosomatics, University
Hospital Heidelberg, 69115 Heidelberg, Germany.
anja.greinacher@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(2)Department of General Internal Medicine and Psychosomatics, University
Hospital Heidelberg, 69115 Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)German Red Cross, Rescue Service Bodensee-Oberschwaben, 88520 Ravensburg,
Germany.
(4)German Red Cross, Baden-Wuerttemberg Regional Association, 70372 Stuttgart,
Germany.

Volunteers active in psychosocial emergency care offer psychological first aid to
survivors of accidents and trauma, their relatives, eye witnesses, bystanders,
and other first responders. So far, there are no studies that investigate the
secondary and primary traumatization of this group of first responders. We
included N = 75 volunteers, who filled out questionnaires to assess their
secondary (QST/FST) and primary traumatization (PDS), and levels of comorbid
psychological stress (PHQ-9, GAD-7, SF-12). We investigated factors of resilience
by measuring attachment behavior (ECR-RD, RQ-2), level of personality functioning
(OPD-SFK), sense of coherence (SOC-29), social support (F-SozU), and mindfulness 
(MAAS). The volunteers' levels of secondary and primary traumatization were below
cut-off scores. Their levels of comorbid psychological stress were comparable to 
representative norm samples. Additionally, the volunteers presented high levels
of resilience. Gender (β = 0.26; p < 0.05), case discussions (β = -0.37; p <
0.05), and social support (β = 0.45; p < 0.01) were revealed to be predictors of 
secondary traumatization, while mindfulness turned out to be a predictor of
primary traumatization (β = -0.34; p = 0.008). However, we cannot rule out that
the low prevalence of traumatization and comorbid psychological stress in our
study sample might not be explained by a positive response bias.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph16173213 
PMCID: PMC6747539
PMID: 31484307  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Int J Equity Health. 2019 Sep 3;18(1):139. doi: 10.1186/s12939-019-1032-0.

Salutogenic health promotion program for migrant women at risk of social
exclusion.

Bonmatí-Tomas A(1)(2)(3), Malagón-Aguilera MC(4)(5), Gelabert-Vilella S(4),
Bosch-Farré C(4)(5), Vaandrager L(6)(7), García-Gil MM(8)(9), Juvinyà-Canal
D(5)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Nursing, University of Girona, Emili Grahit, 77, 17071, Girona,
Spain. anna.bonmati@udg.edu.
(2)Health and Health Care Research Group, University of Girona, Emili Grahit, 77,
17071, Girona, Spain. anna.bonmati@udg.edu.
(3)European Training Consortium-Public Health and Health Promotion, Emili Grahit,
77, 17071, Girona, Spain. anna.bonmati@udg.edu.
(4)Faculty of Nursing, University of Girona, Emili Grahit, 77, 17071, Girona,
Spain.
(5)Health and Health Care Research Group, University of Girona, Emili Grahit, 77,
17071, Girona, Spain.
(6)European Training Consortium-Public Health and Health Promotion, Emili Grahit,
77, 17071, Girona, Spain.
(7)Department of Social Sciences, Heath and Society, Wageningen University &
Research, Hollandseweg 1, Wageningen, KN, 6706, The Netherlands.
(8)Vascular Health Research Group, Unitat de Suport a la Recerca Girona, Institut
Universitari d'Investigació en Atenció Primària Jordi Gol (IDIAPJGol), Girona,
Spain.
(9)Information System for Research in Primary Care (SIDIAP), Institut
Universitari d'Investigació en Atenció Primària Jordi Gol (IDIAPJGol), Barcelona,
Spain.
(10)Chair of Health Promotion, University of Girona, Emili Grahit, 77, 17071,
Girona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Migrant women at risk of social exclusion often experience health
inequities based on gender, country of origin or socioeconomic status.
Traditional health promotion programs designed for this population have focused
on covering their basic needs or modifying lifestyle behaviors. The salutogenic
model of health could offer a new perspective enabling health promotion programs 
to reduce the impact of health inequities. This study evaluated the effectiveness
of a salutogenic health promotion program focused on the empowerment of migrant
women at risk of social exclusion.
METHODS: A four-session salutogenic health promotion program was conducted over a
period of 6 months. In a quasi-experimental pre-test post-test design, an ad hoc 
questionnaire was administered to 26 women to collect sociodemographic data,
together with 5 validated instruments: Antonovsky's Sense of Coherence (SOC-13), 
Duke-UNC-11 (perceived social support), Quality of Life Short Form-36 (SF-36),
Rosenberg's Self-Esteem Scale, and the Cohen et al. Perceived Stress Scale
(PSS-10). Descriptive analysis and multiple linear regression models were
performed. Statistical tests were considered significant with a two-tailed p
value < 0.05.
RESULTS: Participants had a low initial SOC-13 score (60.36; SD 8.16), which did 
not show significant change after the health promotion program. Perceived social 
support (37.07; SD 6.28) and mental quality of life also remained unchanged,
while physical quality of life increased from 50.84 (SD 4.60) to 53.08 (SD 5.31) 
(p = 0.049). Self-esteem showed an increasing trend from 30.14 (SD 4.21) to 31.92
(SD 4.38) (p = 0.120). Perceived stress decreased from 20.57 (SD 2.91) to 18.38
(SD 3.78) (p = 0.016). A greater effect was observed at the end of the program in
women with lower initial scores for SOC-13 and quality of life and higher initial
scores of perceived stress.
CONCLUSIONS: The health promotion program reduced perceived stress, increased
physical quality of life and showed a trend toward increased self-esteem,
especially among migrant women with multiple vulnerability factors. The
salutogenic model of health should be considered as a good practice to apply in
health promotion programs and to be included in national policies to reduce
health inequity in migrant populations.

DOI: 10.1186/s12939-019-1032-0 
PMCID: PMC6724247
PMID: 31481094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. PLoS One. 2019 Aug 30;14(8):e0221977. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0221977.
eCollection 2019.

Effects of freshwater blue spaces may be beneficial for mental health: A first,
ecological study in the North American Great Lakes region.

Pearson AL(1)(2), Shortridge A(1), Delamater PL(3), Horton TH(4), Dahlin K(1),
Rzotkiewicz A(1), Marchiori MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Michigan State University, Department of Geography, Environment & Spatial
Sciences, East Lansing, MI, United States of America.
(2)University of Otago, Department of Public Health, Wellington, New Zealand.
(3)University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Department of Geography and
Carolina Population Center, Chapel Hill, NC, United States of America.
(4)Northwestern University, Department of Anthropology, Evanston, IL, United
States of America.

Research linking green space and mental health abounds. It also appears that
oceanic blue spaces may be salutogenic, benefitting mental health through their
expansive viewscapes, and possibly auditory and olfactory stimuli. Yet, it is
unknown whether the same is true for freshwater bodies. In this ecological study,
we explored associations between hospitalizations for anxiety/mood disorder in
Michigan (>30,000) and proximity to the North American Great Lakes. As a
sensitivity analysis, we examined associations for 15 different inland lake
sizes. Results showed small, protective effects for distance to Great Lake (β =
0.06, p<0.001) and percentage of inland lakes (β = -0.04, p = 0.004).
Unexpectedly, shorter distance to nearest inland lake was associated with higher 
anxiety/mood disorder hospitalizations. The protective effects of percentage area
covered by inland lakes was observed for all lake sizes. These initial findings
provide a foundation for future individual-level research with finer measurement 
of health outcomes and blue space exposure.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0221977 
PMCID: PMC6716663
PMID: 31469889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


49. Qual Life Res. 2020 Jan;29(1):141-151. doi: 10.1007/s11136-019-02279-6. Epub 2019
Aug 29.

Socioeconomic status, social support, oral health beliefs, psychosocial factors, 
health behaviours and health-related quality of life in adolescents.

Gomes AC(1), Rebelo MAB(1), de Queiroz AC(1), de Queiroz Herkrath APC(1),
Herkrath FJ(2), Rebelo Vieira JM(1), Pereira JV(1), Vettore MV(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, Federal University of Amazonas, Avenida Ministro Waldemar
Pedrosa, 1539, Bairro Praça 14, Manaus, Amazonas, CEP 69.025-005, Brazil.
(2)Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Instituto Leônidas & Maria Deane, Rua Terezina, 476,
Adrianópolis, Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil.
(3)Academic Unit of Oral Health, Dentistry and Society, School of Clinical
Dentistry, University of Sheffield, 19 Claremont Crescent, Sheffield, S10 5SX,
UK. m.vettore@sheffield.ac.uk.

PURPOSE: This study assessed the relationships between socioecononic status
(SES), social support, oral health beliefs, psychosocial factors, health-related 
behaviours and health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in adolescents.
METHODS: A school-based follow-up study involving 376 12-year-old adolescents was
conducted in Manaus, Brazil. Baseline data included sociodemographic
characteristics (sex, parental schooling, family income, household overcrowding
and number of goods), social support (SSA questionnaire), oral health beliefs and
psychosocial factors (Sense of Coherence [SOC-13 scale] and self-esteem
[Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale]). Health-related behaviours (toothbrushing
frequency, sedentary behaviour, smoking and sugar consumption) and HRQoL [KINDL
questionnaire] were assessed at 6-month follow-up. Structural Equation Modelling 
assessed the relationships between variables.
RESULTS: Greater social support (β = 0.30), higher SOC (β = 0.23), higher
self-esteem (β = 0.23), higher toothbrushing frequency (β = 0.14) and less
smoking (β = - 0.14) were directly linked with better HRQoL. SES (β = 0.05),
social support (β = 0.26), oral health beliefs (β = - 0.02) were indirectly
linked to HRQoL. Higher SES directly predicted higher toothbrushing frequency
(β = 0.14) and less smoking (β = - 0.22). Greater social support also directly
predicted higher SOC (β = 0.55), positive oral health beliefs (β = - 0.31) and
higher self-esteem (β = 0.58). Greater social support indirectly predicted less
smoking via oral health beliefs (β = - 0.05) and less sugar consumption via SOC
(β = - 0.07).
CONCLUSION: Socioeconomic status, social support, oral health beliefs and
psychosocial factors were important predictors of adolescent's health behaviours 
and HRQoL over 6-month period through direct and indirect mechanisms. Health
behaviours also directly influenced HRQoL.

DOI: 10.1007/s11136-019-02279-6 
PMID: 31468278  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Int Ophthalmol. 2020 Jan;40(1):179-184. doi: 10.1007/s10792-019-01166-w. Epub
2019 Aug 28.

Abnormal stereopsis and reduced retinal sensitivity in patients with retinitis
pigmentosa.

Vingolo EM(1), Limoli PG(2), Steigerwalt RDJ(3), Carlesimo SC(1), Salvatore S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sense Organs, Faculty of Medicine and Odontology, Sapienza
University of Rome, p. le A. Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy.
(2)Low Vision Research Centre of Milan, p.za Sempione 3, 20145, Milan, Italy.
paololimoli@libero.it.
(3), Via A. Brofferio 6, 00195, Rome, Italy.

PURPOSE: The aim of the study was to evaluate retinal sensitivity and
stereoacuity (SA) in retinitis pigmentosa (RP) patients.
METHODS: Twenty-six patients with RP were examined, mean age 36.4 ± 7.21
(SD) years old and best corrected visual acuity better than 0.15 logMAR. The
control group (CG) included 25 healthy subjects matching the RP group by age and 
sex. Every patient and healthy control underwent a complete ophthalmologic
examination: Titmus, Lang, TNO stereotests and microperimetry (MP-1) (Nidek
Technologies). Results were subjected to factor analysis using Varimax rotation, 
and p values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
RESULTS: With the Titmus stereotest, the mean SA was 136.52 ± 26.5 (SD) arcsec in
the RP group and 67.2 ± 11.5 (SD) in CG; Lang SA was 391.39 ± 53.72 (SD) in RP
group and 1150 ± 33.4 (SD) in CG; and TNO SA was 69.3 ± 14.39 (SD) in the RP
group and 15.97 ± 3.7 (SD) in CG. Factor analysis showed significant correlation 
between visual acuity and SA (p = 0.0001) in RP group. MP-1 demonstrated that in 
RP patients, inter-ocular difference in retinal sensitivity and fixation
stability was related to anomalous stereopsis (p values < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Progressive RP degeneration in the cone system could determine a
significant impairment in the binocular vision due to anomalous inter-ocular
retinal sensitivity and incomplete Panum's area utilization, causing an
incongruent retinal localization. These findings suggest a possible reason why RP
patients with a central retinal involvement, even if minimal, perceive a damaged 
stereoscopic perception that produces a severe disability.

DOI: 10.1007/s10792-019-01166-w 
PMID: 31463623  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Front Psychol. 2019 Aug 13;10:1840. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01840. eCollection
2019.

The Application of Wearable Technology to Quantify Health and Wellbeing
Co-benefits From Urban Wetlands.

Reeves JP(1), Knight AT(2)(3)(4), Strong EA(1), Heng V(1), Neale C(5), Cromie
R(1), Vercammen A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Wildfowl & Wetlands Trust (WWT), Slimbridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Ascot, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Botany, Nelson Mandela University, Port Elizabeth, South Africa.
(4)The Silwood Group, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Frank Batten School of Leadership and Public Policy, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA, United States.
(6)Centre for Environmental Policy, Imperial College London, London, United
Kingdom.

Improved nature provision in urban environments offers great potential for
achieving both biodiversity conservation and public health objectives. Yet there 
are few experimental studies that address links between specific natural
environments and physiological and/or psychological changes that could contribute
to the health and wellbeing co-benefits of urban nature. In addition, relative to
green space, the salutogenic impact of aquatic environments are understudied.
Here, we present a feasibility study examining the use of low-cost wearable
technology to quantify the psychophysiological effects of short-term exposure to 
urban wetlands. The study took place at the WWT London Wetland Centre, which is
characterized by its contrasting biodiverse wetland habitat and surrounding urban
setting. Thirty-six healthy participants experienced counterbalanced exposures to
an indoor space, a wetland, an urban site. We continuously recorded
electroencephalographic (EEG) data and real-time physiological stress responses; 
with additional monitoring of post-exposure self-reported mood states. We found a
significant effect of site on mean resting heart rate (HR), with increased HR in 
the urban setting, although this was only observed in participants with
pre-existing high stress. We found no significant differences in other measures
of physiological stress responses (heart rate variability and electrodermal
activity). The EEG data showed modulation of high beta band activity only in the 
wetland setting, potentially related to changes in attention. However, the EEG
findings were confounded by low quality signals and artifacts caused by movement 
and environmental interference. Assessments of self-reported mood states
demonstrated an increase in positive feelings in the wetland setting. A
pronounced decrease in negative feelings in the wetland setting was observed in
stressed individuals only. Our results suggest that pre-existing stress levels
may be an important modulator of the salutogenic effect of blue-green space. We
provide partial support for the hypothesis that exposure to blue-green space
promotes stress recovery and for the use of low-cost psychophysiological
measurements to quantify the potential stress-reducing effects of blue-green
space exposure in urban dwellers. Further technological refinement is required
for this approach to become a viable tool to support evidence-based
decision-making for public health and green/blue space provision.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01840 
PMCID: PMC6700336
PMID: 31456718 


52. Midwifery. 2019 Dec;79:102529. doi: 10.1016/j.midw.2019.102529. Epub 2019 Aug 14.

'I'm having a baby not a labour': Sense of coherence and women's attitudes
towards labour and birth.

Ferguson S(1), Davis D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health, University of Canberra, University Drive, Bruce, ACT, 2617,
Australia. Electronic address: sally.ferguson@canberra.edu.au.
(2)Faculty of Health, University of Canberra, University Drive, Bruce, ACT, 2617,
Australia; Centenary Hospital for Women, Youth and Children, Garran, ACT, 2605,
Australia. Electronic address: deborah.davis@canberra.edu.au.

OBJECTIVE: In Western countries, caesarean section rates are increasing and
spontaneous vaginal birth rates are decreasing at a rapid rate. This trend has
implications for childbearing women's health and calls into question the use of
pathogenesis to frame maternity services. The theory and practice of
salutogenesis offers a viable alternative as it emphasises health rather than
illness. Sense of coherence and generalized resistant resources (GRRs) are the
cornerstones of salutogenesis and sense of coherence is a predictive indicator of
health. As strong sense of coherence in pregnant women is associated with half
the likelihood of caesarean section compared to women with weak sense of
coherence, the objective of this study is to examine the association between
sense of coherence and women's attitude towards their birthing experiences.
DESIGN, SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: This paper reports on the qualitative component
only of a longitudinal study where 753 women planning to have their babies in an 
Australian tertiary maternity service, completed questionnaires in pregnancy and 
postnatally. Women answered one openended question during the pregnancy and one
open-ended question approximately eight weeks postnatally. Data were analysed by 
qualitative content analysis.
FINDINGS: When the open-text responses of 119 women with strong sense of
coherence and 177 women with weak sense of coherence were analysed, the
categories of Language, Demeanour and Focus were identified. Women with strong
sense of coherence have a positive, relaxed and baby-focused attitude. In
salutogenic terms this attitude towards labour and birth can be described as
increased comprehensibility, increased manageability, decreased meaningfulness in
the experience of giving birth, increased internal GRRs and increased external
GRRs. Women with weak sense of coherence have a more negative, worried and
labour-focused attitude. In salutogenic terms this attitude towards labour and
birth can be described as decreased comprehensibility, decreased manageability,
increased meaningfulness in the experience of giving birth, decreased internal
GRRs and decreased external GRRs.
KEY CONCLUSION: Strong sense of coherence in childbearing women is expressed
through a positive, relaxed and baby-focused attitude while weak sense of
coherence is expressed through negative, worried and labour-focused attitude in
childbearing women towards labour and birth.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: As sense of coherence is a modifiable predictor of
health, application of the study findings could focus on midwifery work including
antenatal education that aims to decrease caesarean section rates by
strengthening women's sense of coherence in pregnancy.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.midw.2019.102529 
PMID: 31445474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Nurs Manag. 2019 Nov;27(8):1620-1630. doi: 10.1111/jonm.12848. Epub 2019 Oct
16.

Relationship between sense of coherence, health and work engagement among nurses.

Malagon-Aguilera MC(1)(2), Suñer-Soler R(1)(2), Bonmatí-Tomas A(1)(2),
Bosch-Farré C(1)(2), Gelabert-Vilella S(2), Juvinyà-Canal D(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Nursing Department, Faculty of Nursing, University of Girona, Girona, Spain.
(2)Nursing Department, Health and Health Care Research Group, University of
Girona, Girona, Spain.

AIM: To examine the sense of coherence among registered nurses and its
relationship with health and work engagement.
BACKGROUND: Sense of coherence is a global orientation to view life as
structured, manageable and meaningful and have the capacity to cope with
stressful situations. A high sense of coherence score indicates that an
individual can understand, manage and attribute meaning to events in his or her
life as well as in the work environment. Registered nurses face many workplace
stressors that may be easier to manage with a strong sense of coherence; however,
the effect of this score on their self-reported health status and work engagement
remains unknown.
METHODS: In a cross-sectional study, 109 registered nurses working in a long-term
care setting responded to a self-administered questionnaire. Social support,
work-related family conflicts, sense of coherence, self-reported health status
and work engagement variables were analysed using multiple linear regression
models.
RESULTS: Nurses with a high sense of coherence score reported no work-related
family conflicts (mean difference -6.91; 95% CI -10.65 to -3.18; p = .000),
better health (r = .408) and greater work engagement (r = .223), compared to
their peers with lower sense of coherence. The association between sense of
coherence and self-reported health was confirmed by linear regression modelling
(β = .276, p = .003).
CONCLUSIONS: Nurses with a higher sense of coherence had better health and
greater work engagement. The work engagement variable showing the highest
association with sense of coherence was dedication.
IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING MANAGEMENT: Implementing interventions that increase
sense of coherence among nurses can increase commitment to their work, to the
institution and to building more engaged teams.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jonm.12848 
PMID: 31444895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nurs Crit Care. 2020 Mar;25(2):117-125. doi: 10.1111/nicc.12466. Epub 2019 Aug
16.

Post-traumatic stress symptoms and sense of coherence in proximity to intensive
care unit discharge.

Valsø Å(1)(2)(3), Rustøen T(2)(3), Skogstad L(4), Schou-Bredal I(3)(5), Ekeberg
Ø(6)(7), Småstuen MC(2)(8), Myhren H(9), Sunde K(10)(11), Tøien K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Postoperative and Intensive Care, Division of Emergencies and
Critical Care, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Research and Development, Division of Emergencies and Critical
Care, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Institute of Health and Society, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway.
(4)Department of Nursing and Health Promotion, Prehospital Trauma Care - Bachelor
paramedics, OsloMet - Oslo Metropolitan University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Unit for Breast- and Endocrine Surgery, Division of Cancer, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(6)Department of Behavioral Sciences in Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo,
Norway.
(7)Division of Mental Health and Addiction, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway.
(8)Department of Public Health, OsloMet - Oslo Metropolitan University, Oslo,
Norway.
(9)Department of Acute medicine, Division of Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway.
(10)Department of Anesthesiology, Division of Emergencies and Critical Care, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(11)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Post-traumatic stress (PTS) symptoms following intensive care unit
(ICU) treatment can lead to post-traumatic stress disorder and represent a severe
health burden. In trauma patients, a strong sense of coherence (SOC) is
associated with fewer PTS symptoms. However, this association has not been
investigated in a general ICU sample.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: To examine the occurrence of PTS symptoms in general ICU
patients early after ICU discharge and to assess possible associations between
PTS symptoms and SOC, ICU memory, pain, and demographic and clinical
characteristics.
DESIGN: This was a cross-sectional study.
METHODS: Adult patients aged ≥18 years admitted for ≥24 hours to five ICUs
between 2014 and 2016 were recruited. PTS symptoms and SOC were measured at the
ward within the first week after discharge from the ICU using the Posttraumatic
Stress Scale-10 and Sense of Coherence Scale-13. Multiple linear regression
analysis was used to identify associations between PTS symptoms and SOC and the
selected independent variables.
RESULTS: A total of 523 patients were included (17.8% trauma patients; median age
57 years [range 18-94]; 53.3% male). The prevalence of clinically significant PTS
symptoms was 32%. After adjustments for gender and age, lower SOC (P < 0.001),
more ICU delusional memories (P < 0.001), greater pain interference (P < 0.001), 
not being a trauma patient (P = 0.02), and younger age (P = 0.03) were
significantly associated with more PTS symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: One third of patients experienced clinically relevant PTS symptoms
early after discharge from the ICU. In the present study, SOC, delusional memory,
pain interference, younger age, and not being a trauma patient were factors
associated with more PTS symptoms.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: Early individual follow up after ICU discharge
focusing on pain relief and delusional memory may reduce PTS symptoms, with a
potential of improving rehabilitation.

© 2019 British Association of Critical Care Nurses.

DOI: 10.1111/nicc.12466 
PMID: 31418993  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Rehabil Med. 2019 Sep 3;51(8):557-565. doi: 10.2340/16501977-2585.

Effect of a dialogue-based intervention on psychosocial well-being 6 months after
stroke in Norway: A randomized controlled trial.

Hjelle EG(1), Bragstad LK, Kirkevold M, Zucknick M, Bronken BA, Martinsen R,
Kvigne KJ, Kitzmüller G, Mangset M, Thommessen B, Sveen U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing Science and Research Center for Habilitation and
Rehabilitation Services and Models (CHARM), Faculty of Medicine, University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway. e.g.hjelle@medisin.uio.no.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of a dialogue-based intervention on
psychosocial well-being 6 months after stroke.
DESIGN: Multicentre, prospective, randomized controlled trial.
SUBJECTS: Adults (aged ≥ 18 years) who had their first or recurrent stroke within
the last month, were medically stable, had sufficient cognitive functioning to
participate and understood and spoke Norwegian.
METHODS: A total of 322 participants were randomly assigned to the intervention
(n = 166) or control (n = 156) group. Participants in the intervention group
received up to 8 individual sessions aimed at supporting the coping and life
skills of stroke survivors in addition to usual care. The primary outcome was the
proportion of participants with normal mood measured by the General Health
Questionnaire-28 (GHQ-28). The secondary outcomes included health-related quality
of life (Stroke and Aphasia Quality of Life Scale; SAQOL-39g), depression
(Yale-Brown single-item questionnaire; Yale) and sense of coherence (SOC-13).
RESULTS: After controlling for the baseline values, no significant benefit was
found in the intervention group over the control group (odds ratio (OR): 0.898:
95% confidence interval (95% CI): 0.54-1.50, p = 0.680) 6 months post-stroke.
CONCLUSION: Psychosocial well-being improved during the first 6 months after
stroke in both arms of the trial, but no statistically significant benefit of the
dialogue-based intervention was found compared with usual care.

DOI: 10.2340/16501977-2585 
PMID: 31411337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Transl Neurosci. 2019 Aug 7;10:187-194. doi: 10.1515/tnsci-2019-0033. eCollection
2019.

Coping Strategies for Oral Health Problems by People with Schizophrenia.

Paredes FS(1)(2), Rude N(2), Moussa-Badran S(1), Pelletier JF(3), Rat C(4), Denis
F(4)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Université Champagne Ardenne. Faculté d'Odontologie de Reims, 51100 Reims,
France.
(2)EA 481 Integrative Neurosciences and Clinical, University Hospital of
Besançon, F-25000 Besançon, France.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Montreal University, Yale Program for Recovery and
Community Health, Montreal, Canada.
(4)Clinical research unit, La Chartreuse psychiatric center, Dijon, France.
(5)EA 75-05 Education, Ethique, Santé, Université de Tours, Faculté de Médecine, 
37032 Tours, France.
(6)Université de Nantes, Faculté d'Odontologie de Nantes, Nantes, France.

Background: Persons with schizophrenia are particularity susceptible to poor oral
health. Symptoms of schizophrenia often affect oral health behaviors and
lifestyle. The aim was to explore coping strategies used by people with
schizophrenia in oral health in order to understand and to best involve them in
the management of their own oral health in daily life.
Materials and methods: This is systematic review reported in accordance with the 
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA)
statements. We included cross-sectional and longitudinal quantitative and
qualitative studies that 1) examined coping strategies regarding oral health in
persons with schizophrenia or 2) examined coping strategies were used in dental
care. We included studies conducted with at least one PWS aged 18 years old more 
and without restriction on sex, socioeconomic status, or language.
Results: The 8 studies included suggest that coping strategies depends on complex
translation processes that can be either personal (e.g., psychological
symptomatology, neuropsychological functioning to adversely affect hope,
self-esteem, self-stigma, self-determination, sense of coherence, and resilience)
and/or environmental factors (e.g., peer support and efficacy of rehabilitations 
programs). We further identified that the main factor influencing coping
strategies was dental stress situation.
Conclusions: This review suggests that coping strategies play a crucial role in
the recovery process for oral health of PWS. Translation processes in oral health
should be more explored in the future to clarify the capacity of PWS to cope with
essential self-care in oral health on daily life.

DOI: 10.1515/tnsci-2019-0033 
PMCID: PMC6689214
PMID: 31410302 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors report no
conflicts of interest.


57. Psychol Health Med. 2020 Jul;25(6):719-729. doi: 10.1080/13548506.2019.1653480.
Epub 2019 Aug 13.

Psychosocial aspects and self-reporting of cardiovascular diseases in Brazilian
adults.

Michele M R R(1), Tonantzin R G(1), Mraia Teresa A O(1)(2), Marcos P P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós Graduação em Saúde Coletiva, Universidade do Vale do Rio dos
Sinos , São Leopoldo, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Nutrição, Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde de Porto
Alegre , Porto Alegre, Brazil.

The study aimed to evaluate the effect of psychosocial aspects on self-reporting 
of cardiovascular diseases (CVDs). The hypotheses were that psychosocial aspects 
have a direct or indirect effect on health behaviors, cardiovascular disease risk
factors (CVDRFs) and CVDs. A cross-sectional population-based study was conducted
with a representative sample of 1100 adults from the urban area of a medium-sized
municipality in southern Brazil. Structured interviews were conducted using a
standardized and pre-tested questionnaire. The psychosocial aspects included
scales of resilience, quality of life, sense of coherence and social support. The
outcomes were CVDs and CVDRFs measured by single items asking participants
whether a physician had stated that they had heart disease, high blood pressure
or high cholesterol/triglycerides or were overweight (BMI≥25 kg/m2). Data
analysis was based on structural equation models. The final model exhibited good 
fit : (χ2[57] = 155, p < 0.001, root-mean-square error of approximation [RMSEA] =
0.042, confirmatory fit index [CFI] = 0.902 and standardized root-mean-square
residual [SRMR] = 0.042). Consistent with our direct effect hypothesis, favorable
psychosocial aspects were inversely associated with CVDRFS (β = -0.15, p = 0.011)
and with CVDs (β = -0.10, p = 0.048). The indirect effect through health
behaviors was not confirmed. The findings suggest that psychosocial aspects may
influence the presence of self-reported CVDs or CVDRFS.

DOI: 10.1080/13548506.2019.1653480 
PMID: 31405296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2019 Aug;67(S3):S571-S576. doi: 10.1111/jgs.15899.

Environmental Factors Associated with Chinese Older Immigrants' Social
Engagement.

Lai DWL(1), Li J(1), Lee VWP(1), Dong X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Social Sciences, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
Kowloon, Hong Kong.
(2)Institute for Health, Health Care Policy and Aging Research, Rutgers
University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey.

BACKGROUND/ OBJECTIVES: Prior research has shown that social engagement is
beneficial to older adults' health and well-being. This study examined the
association between environmental factors and social engagement of older Chinese 
immigrants in the United States.
SAMPLE: A cross-sectional data set of Chinese immigrants in the greater Chicago, 
IL, area (Population Study of Chinese Elderly; n = 3159), was used in this study.
DESIGN: Multiple regression models were used to test the associations between
older adults' engagement in cognitive and social activities and environmental
factors, including financial difficulties, social support, neighborhood cohesion,
neighborhood disorder, and sense of community.
MEASUREMENT: Eight questions measuring participants' engagement in cognitive and 
social activities, a single-item question measuring financial difficulties, a
12-item social support measurement, an eight-item neighborhood cohesion
measurement, and a six-item neighborhood disorder and sense of community scale.
RESULTS: Having fewer financial difficulties and a cohesive neighborhood is
related to a higher level of engagement in both cognitive and social activities. 
More social support from family and friends and a sense of community are
associated with higher levels of social activities engagement, but not cognitive 
activity engagement. Neighborhood cohesion has a stronger association with social
engagement than other environmental factors and most individual-level factors.
Surprisingly, neighborhood disorder is positively related to social activity
engagement, which needs further examination. The associations between
environmental factors and social engagement showed no significant difference
between healthy and unhealthy older adults.
CONCLUSION: This study highlights the need for policies and programs to promote
an active lifestyle among older immigrants by creating facilitative social and
physical environments. J Am Geriatr Soc 67:S571-S576, 2019.

© 2019 The American Geriatrics Society.

DOI: 10.1111/jgs.15899 
PMID: 31403190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Sex Reprod Healthc. 2019 Oct;21:87-94. doi: 10.1016/j.srhc.2019.06.003. Epub 2019
Jun 12.

Caesarean birth experiences. A qualitative study from Sierra Leone.

Husby AE(1), van Duinen AJ(2), Aune I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, St. Olav's Hospital, Trondheim University Hospital, 
Postbox 3250 Torgarden, NO-7006 Trondheim, Norway. Electronic address:
an-husb@online.no.
(2)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science
and Technology, Norway; Department of Surgery, St Olav's Hospital, Trondheim
University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway. Electronic address:
aalke.j.v.duinen@ntnu.no.
(3)Department of Public Health and Nursing, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway. Electronic
address: ingvild.aune@ntnu.no.

BACKGROUND: Positive birth experiences lead to better postnatal functioning, and 
influence mode of delivery choice for subsequent pregnancies. Healthcare workers 
can influence the birth experience through relevant support and care. This study 
seeks to explore the experience of Sierra Leonean women in relation to
ante-natal, intrapartum and post-partum care with special reference to their
experience of caesarean section.
METHODS: In November 2016, individual semi structured interviews were performed
with sixteen women of varying age from different geographical areas, levels of
schooling, and parity. The interviews were analysed by systematic text
condensation.
RESULTS: During interviews, participants mentioned a fear of dying or losing
their baby. This fear was managed by praying and putting trust in a higher power.
However, placing trust in healthcare workers was also described by some
participants. Moreover, the present study demonstrates that women experienced a
great deal of pain and discomfort after the caesarean section was performed, and 
that they found it difficult to return to expected activities. This was managed
by a large amount of practical assistance from their social network. Healthcare
workers were described as providing medicines, advice, and practical care.
Negative experiences in which healthcare workers took money for medicines and
refused to help women were also described.
CONCLUSIONS: This study indicates that women locate resources to cope with pain
and fear within themselves, while also utilising extended support from social
networks and healthcare workers. This confirms that women from all backgrounds in
Sierra Leone have access to resources for health and well-being.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.srhc.2019.06.003 
PMID: 31395239  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cien Saude Colet. 2019 Aug 5;24(8):3057-3066. doi:
10.1590/1413-81232018248.22642017.

Sense of coherence and factors associated with school performance of adolescents.

[Article in English, Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the
publisher]

Oliva MIG(1), Cunha IPD(2), Silva AND(3), Miallhe FL(2), Cortellazzi KL(2),
Meneghim MC(2), Coelho TC(1), Lacerda VR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Odontologia Comunitária e Especial, Faculdade de Odontologia
Prof. Albino Coimbra Filho, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso do Sul. Av.
Senador Filinto Müller s/n, Vila Ipiranga. 70070-900 Campo Grande MS Brasil.
mariaisabel.gandra@yahoo.com.br.
(2)Departamento de Odontologia Social, Faculdade de Odontologia de Piracicaba,
Universidade Estadual de Campinas. Piracicaba SP Brasil.
(3)Departamento de Saúde em Sociedade, Universidade Federal Fluminense. Niterói
RJ Brasil.

School performance is a key aspect for future professional and social success.
The objective of the present study was to investigate factors associated with
adolescents' school performance including sense of coherence (SOC) and oral
health status. Three hundred eighty one schoolchildren between 15 and 18 years of
age from the city of Campo Grande, Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil, participated in
the study. The outcome variable was school performance, assessed through the
final grades of the Portuguese and Mathematics disciplines in 2013. Independent
variables were sociodemographic data, self-perception of oral health, use of
dental services and sense of coherence, obtained through a self-applied
questionnaire. In addition, in a clinical assessment, the number of decayed,
missing and filled teeth (DMFT index) was evaluated. Logistic regression analyses
were performed, based on a hierarchical model. The mean age of students was 16
years; mean DMFT value 4.1, and SOC 44.5. In the final adjustment, the male
subjects (p = 0.0021); those with the largest number of people residing at home
(p = 0.0021) and weak SOC (p = 0.0005) showed an association with poorer school
performance. In conclusion, school performance is a complex phenomenon associated
with SOC and oral characteristics.

Publisher: O desempenho escolar é um aspecto fundamental para o futuro sucesso
profissional e social. O objetivo do presente estudo foi investigar os fatores
associados ao desempenho escolar dos adolescentes, incluindo o Senso de Coerência
(SOC) e o estado de saúde bucal. Foram incluídos, no estudo, 381 escolares entre 
15 e 18 anos de idade da cidade de Campo Grande, Mato Grosso do Sul, Brasil. O
desfecho foi o desempenho escolar avaliado por meio das notas finais das
disciplinas de Português e Matemática em 2013. As variáveis independentes foram
dados sociodemográficos, autopercepção de saúde bucal, uso de serviços
odontológicos e Senso de Coerência, obtidos por um questionário autoaplicado.
Além disso, avaliou-se o número de dentes cariados, perdidos e obturados (índice 
de CPO-D). Análises de regressão logística foram realizadas, com base em um
modelo hierárquico. A idade média dos alunos foi de 16 anos; valor médio do CPO-D
4,1 e SOC 44,5. No ajuste final, os indivíduos do sexo masculino (p = 0,0021);
aqueles com o maior número de pessoas que moravam em casa (p = 0,0021) e o SOC
fraco (p = 0,0005) mostraram associação com o menor desempenho escolar. Em
conclusão, o desempenho escolar é um fenômeno complexo, associado ao SOC e às
características bucais.
DOI: 10.1590/1413-81232018248.22642017 
PMID: 31389552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Community Ment Health J. 2019 Oct;55(7):1246-1252. doi:
10.1007/s10597-019-00446-0. Epub 2019 Aug 6.

Disordered Eating Pathology and Body Image Among Adolescent Girls in Israel: The 
Role of Sense of Coherence.

Latzer Y(1)(2), Weinberger-Litman SL(3), Spivak-Lavi Z(4), Tzischinsky O(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Work, Faculty of Social Welfare and Health Sciences,
University of Haifa, 31905, Haifa, Israel. latzery@gmail.com.
(2)Eating Disorders Clinic, Psychiatric Division, Rambam Medical Center, Haifa,
Israel. latzery@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Psychology, Marymount Manhattan College, 221 E71st St, New York,
NY, 10021, USA.
(4)Department of Social Work, Emek Yezreel College, Emek Yezreel, Israel.
(5)Department of Psychology, Emek Yezreel College, Emek Yezreel, Israel.

Disordered eating pathology (DEP) represents a range of behaviors and attitudes, 
from negative body image to full blown eating disorders, appearing mainly in
adolescent females. DEP is related to a plethora of biological and psychological 
factors, including various coping strategies. Sense of coherence (SOC) is a
coping mechanism defined as an external and internal ability to adapt to stress
and has been found to be associated with better mental health outcomes. However, 
SOC has not been examined in relation to DEP. Therefore, the aim of this study is
to examine the relationship between SOC, DEP and body image disturbances among
adolescent girls. The sample consisted of 248 Israeli girls (12-18), who
completed self-reported questionnaires. SOC was negatively associated with DEP
and body dissatisfaction. The overall rate of those in the high risk group for
EDs was found to be higher than previously seen among samples from a similar
population (22.5% vs. 19.5%), and was found to have a significantly lower levels 
of SOC and more negative body image than those at lower risk. Greater SOC was
found to be associated with lower levels of DEP. It is suggested that
strengthening SOC be incorporated into eating disorder prevention and treatment. 
Results emphasize the importance of SOC to well-being and mental health.

DOI: 10.1007/s10597-019-00446-0 
PMID: 31388895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. BMC Med Educ. 2019 Aug 5;19(1):302. doi: 10.1186/s12909-019-1730-8.

Motives, experiences and psychological strain in medical students engaged in
refugee care in a reception center- a mixed-methods approach.

Kindermann D(1), Jenne MP(2), Schmid C(2), Bozorgmehr K(3), Wahedi K(3), Junne
F(4), Szecsenyi J(3), Herzog W(2), Nikendei C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Internal Medicine and Psychosomatics, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. David.Kindermann@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(2)Department of General Internal Medicine and Psychosomatics, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of General Practice and Health Services Research, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, Medical University
Hospital Tübingen,University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The UN Refugee Agency has reported that an increasing number of
people are being forcibly displaced worldwide. Despite this, global health
issues, especially initiatives focusing on physical and psychological conditions 
of refugees, are still rarely considered in medical curricula. Furthermore, there
is little evidence regarding the experiences and possible related psychological
strain of medical students who work with refugees. Therefore, the present study
aimed to investigate motivations, learning achievements and experiences, as well 
as psychological strain and possible protective factors, in medical students
volunteering in a reception center for refugees.
METHODS: In this prospective study using a mixed-methods approach, we applied (1)
qualitative content analysis of semi-standardized interviews in a pre-post design
in a subsample of n = 16 students. The aims were to analyze (1a) the students'
motivations and experiences in the reception center, and (1b) the students'
perceived learning achievement. We further administered (2) psychometric
questionnaires using a cross-sectional approach to n = 62 students in order to
examine (2a) the students' psychological strain, in terms of secondary
traumatization, depression, anxiety and health-related quality of life, and (2b) 
possible protective factors such as attachment style and sense of coherence.
RESULTS: The content analysis of the students' interviews revealed three main
categories before the assignment and four main categories subsequently,
displaying a broad variety of perspectives. Quantitative analysis identified that
3.2% of the students showed moderate secondary traumatization, and a correlation 
emerged between the number of shifts and symptom severity of secondary
traumatization. The students displayed significantly reduced scores for
depression and anxiety, when compared to a sample of first-year medical students.
Sense of coherence was identified as a protective factor concerning secondary
traumatization.
CONCLUSION: A rather small proportion of the medical students working in the
reception center displayed explicit symptoms of psychological strain in terms of 
secondary traumatic stress. Due to their assignments, students were able to
improve their cultural awareness, which they reported to be highly relevant for
their future occupation. In view of increasing globalization, theoretical and
practical courses on issues of flight and global health might therefore be
implemented as an obligatory part of medical curricula.

DOI: 10.1186/s12909-019-1730-8 
PMCID: PMC6683371
PMID: 31382943  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Nutrients. 2019 Aug 2;11(8). pii: E1789. doi: 10.3390/nu11081789.

Self-Report Dieters: Who Are They?

Sares-Jäske L(1)(2), Knekt P(3), Männistö S(3), Lindfors O(3), Heliövaara M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health Solutions, National Institute for Health and
Welfare, 00271 Helsinki, Finland. laura.sares-jaske@thl.fi.
(2)Department of Public Health, University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland. 
laura.sares-jaske@thl.fi.
(3)Department of Public Health Solutions, National Institute for Health and
Welfare, 00271 Helsinki, Finland.

Dieting attempts have become popular worldwide. Dieting, however, seems to have
both positive and negative health-related consequences. So far, only a few
studies have focused on the determinants of dieting in detail. This study
explores the association between self-report dieting attempts and intentional
weight loss (IWL) during the previous year and several demographic, lifestyle,
health, and psychological factors in a cross-sectional study design using data
from the representative Finnish Health 2000 Survey. The sample comprised 2147 men
and 2378 women, aged 30-69. Information for potential determinants was assembled 
via health examinations, interviews, and questionnaires. Approximately 24% of the
men and 39% of the women reported dieting attempts and 10% of the men and 15% of 
the women reported IWL. Dieting attempts were associated with younger age,
education, BMI, formerly smoking, more favourable values in lifestyle variables, 
and unfavorable values in serum HDL and triglycerides, a worse sense of
coherence, concerns about one's appearance, and concerns about one's health.
Among men, diabetics and those sleeping ≤6 h a night more frequently reported
dieting attempts and those with osteoarthritis reported IWL. Moreover, the
gradient between BMI and dieting attempts was significantly stronger in men than 
in women. Men seem to attempt dieting when they have actual health-related
reasons, while such reasons are not so strongly associated with dieting in women.
These findings can be used for determining subpopulations with obesity and real
weight-loss needs and, alternatively, subpopulations with normal weight
unnecessarily attempting dieting.

DOI: 10.3390/nu11081789 
PMCID: PMC6723801
PMID: 31382439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Appl Math Model. 2019 Aug;72:537-552. doi: 10.1016/j.apm.2019.03.030.

Accounting for data sparsity when forming spatially coherent zones.

Hassall KL(1), Whitmore AP(2), Milne AE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Analytical Sciences, Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, AL5
2JQ, UK.
(2)Sustainable Agricultural Systems, Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, AL5 2JQ, UK.

Efficient farm management can be aided by the identification of zones in the
landscape. These zones can be informed from different measured variables by
ensuring a sense of spatial coherence. Forming spatially coherent zones is an
established method in the literature, but has been found to perform poorly when
data are sparse. In this paper, we describe the different types of data sparsity 
and investigate how this impacts the performance of established methods. We
introduce a set of methodological advances that address these shortcomings to
provide a method for forming spatially coherent zones under data sparsity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apm.2019.03.030 
PMCID: PMC6559136
PMID: 31379403 


65. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019 Jul 11;16(14). pii: E2464. doi:
10.3390/ijerph16142464.

Experiences of the Urban Green Local Environment as a Factor for Well-Being among
Adults: An Exploratory Qualitative Study in Southern Sweden.

Weimann H(1), Björk J(1), Håkansson C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Medicon village, Lund
University, SE-223 81 Lund, Sweden.
(2)Division of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Medicon village, Lund
University, SE-223 81 Lund, Sweden. Carita.Hakansson@med.lu.se.

The amount and quality of greenness in the local outdoor environment has
repeatedly been linked to human well-being. Different types of green areas are
likely required in order to meet the various needs of people throughout the
course of their lives and with regard to individual social and economic living
conditions. The aim of the present study was to increase the understanding of
different pathways between green environments, well-being and health. We
conducted 16 interviews to explore perceptions and experiences among adults
residing in a semi-urban to urban area and derived categories and subcategories
from the data using content analysis. We identified six categories; promoting
activities, supporting social contacts, stimulating sensory impressions,
providing a retreat, offering ways to influence and creating a sense of
coherence, and we recognized that the availability to, and contrasts between and 
maintenance of the environment were experienced as prerequisites for
health-promoting properties of the green local environment. The results
illustrate a rich variety in potential pathways through which the green local
environment may promote well-being. The study highlights the need to plan the
local environment from multiple perspectives, as well as carefully considering
prerequisites of various kinds in order for the green environment to support
health across the life-course.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph16142464 
PMCID: PMC6678511
PMID: 31373298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Chem Phys. 2019 Jul 28;151(4):044703. doi: 10.1063/1.5109378.

Role of coherence in the plasmonic control of molecular absorption.

Coccia E(1), Corni S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Padova, via Marzolo 1, Padova, 
Italy.

The interpretation of nanoplasmonic effects on molecular properties, such as
metal-enhanced absorption or fluorescence, typically assumes a fully coherent
picture (in the quantum-mechanical sense) of the phenomena. Yet, there may be
conditions where the coherent picture breaks down, and the decoherence effect
should be accounted for. Using a state-of-the-art multiscale model approach able 
to include environment-induced dephasing, here we show that metal nanoparticle
effects on the light absorption by a nearby molecule is strongly affected (even
qualitatively, i.e., suppression vs enhancement) by molecular electronic
decoherence. The present work shows that decoherence can be thought of as a
further design element of molecular nanoplasmonic systems.

DOI: 10.1063/1.5109378 
PMID: 31370514 


67. Palliat Med. 2019 Dec;33(10):1310-1318. doi: 10.1177/0269216319866653. Epub 2019 
Aug 1.

Family sense of coherence and its associations with hope, anxiety and symptoms of
depression in persons with cancer in palliative phase and their family members: A
cross-sectional study.

Möllerberg ML(1), Årestedt K(2)(3), Swahnberg K(2), Benzein E(2)(4), Sandgren
A(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Linnaeus University, Kalmar/Växjö,
Sweden.
(3)The Research Section, Kalmar County Council, Kalmar, Sweden.
(4)Center for Collaborative Palliative Care, Linnaeus University, Växjö, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: There is evidence indicating that family sense of coherence predicts 
quality of family life and promotes family well-being. In families living with
the palliative phase of cancer, low hope, anxiety and symptoms of depression are 
common in both persons with cancer and their family members.
AIM: To determine whether family sense of coherence was associated with hope,
anxiety and symptoms of depression, respectively, in persons with cancer in the
palliative phase and their family members.
DESIGN: An observational, cross-sectional, multicentre study was conducted.
Nested linear regression analyses were performed in two blocks to determine
whether family sense of coherence was associated with hope, anxiety and symptoms 
of depression.
SETTING/PARTICIPANTS: Persons with cancer (n = 179) and their family members (n =
165) were recruited from two oncology clinics and two palliative centres in three
regions in Sweden.
RESULTS: The main findings showed that family sense of coherence was
significantly and independently associated with hope, anxiety and symptoms of
depression. Stronger family sense of coherence was associated with higher hope
and lower anxiety and symptoms of depression levels in both persons with cancer
and their family members.
CONCLUSION: Health care providers should strive to identify families with weak
family sense of coherence, because of its associations with hope, anxiety and
symptoms of depression, in order to offer them professional support and thereby
achieve increased well-being during the palliative phase of cancer. Future
studies should expand our knowledge of family sense of coherence and how to
identify families at risk of lower levels of well-being.

DOI: 10.1177/0269216319866653 
PMID: 31368844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Transl Med UniSa. 2019 Jan 6;19:5-10. eCollection 2019 Jan-Jun.

Integrated Care Models for Managing and Preventing Frailty: A Systematic Review
for the European Joint Action on Frailty Prevention (ADVANTAGE JA).

Hendry A(1), Vanhecke E(2), Carriazo AM(3), López-Samaniego L(4), Espinosa JM(5),
Sezgin D(6), O'Donovan M(6), Hammar T(7), Ferry P(8), Vella A(8), Bacaicoa OA(9),
Braga M(10), Ciutan M(11), Velivasi A(12), Lamprini Koula M(12), Van der Heyden
J(13), Liew A(6), O'Caoimh R(6).

Author information: 
(1)NHS Lanarkshire, United Kingdom.
(2)Ministry of Health and Social Affairs, France.
(3)Consejeria de Salud de la Junta de Andalucia, Sevilla, Spain.
(4)Fundación Progreso y Salud, Consejería de Salud de la Junta de Andalucía,
Sevilla, Spain.
(5)Servicio Andaluz de Salud, Sevilla, Spain.
(6)Clinical Sciences Institute, National University of Ireland, Galway, Galway
City, Ireland.
(7)National Institute for Health and Welfare, Finland, Helsinki, Finland.
(8)Ministry for the Family and Social Solidarity, Malta.
(9)Centro de Excelencia en Investigación en Cronicidad (KRONIKGUNE), Barakaldo,
Spain.
(10)Agenzia Nazionale per i Servizi Sanitari Regionali, Italy.
(11)Scoala Nationala de Sanatate Publica, Management si Perfectionare in Domeniul
Sanitar, Bucharest, Romania.
(12)Society of Psychosocial Research and Intervention. Ioannina, Greece.
(13)Sciensano, Brussels, Belgium.

Frailty requires concerted integrated approaches to prevent functional decline.
Although there is evidence that integrating care is effective for older people,
there is insufficient data on outcomes from studies implementing integrated care 
to prevent and manage frailty. We systematically searched PubMed and Cochrane
Library database for peer-reviewed medical literature on models of care for
frailty, published from 2002 to 2017. We considered the effective and
transferable components of the models of care and evidence of economic impact,
where available. Information on European Union-funded projects or those
registered with the European Innovation Partnership on Active and Healthy Ageing,
and grey literature (including good practices) were also considered. We found
1,065 potential citations and 170 relevant abstracts. After excluding reports on 
specific diseases, processes or interventions and service models that did not
report data, 42 full papers met the inclusion criteria. The evidence showed that 
few models of integrated care were specifically designed to prevent and tackle
frailty in the community and at the interface between primary and secondary
(hospital) care. Current evidence supports the case for a more holistic and
salutogenic response to frailty, blending a chronic care approach with education,
enablement and rehabilitation to optimise function, particularly at times of a
sudden deterioration in health, or when transitioning between home, hospital or
care home. In all care settings, these approaches should be supported by
comprehensive assessment and multidimensional interventions tailored to
modifiable physical, psychological, cognitive and social factors.


PMCID: PMC6581495
PMID: 31360661 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors report no
conflict of interest.


69. Aging Ment Health. 2020 Oct;24(10):1645-1653. doi: 10.1080/13607863.2019.1647133.
Epub 2019 Jul 30.

Sense of community and its relationship with psychological well-being in assisted
living.

Plys E(1)(2), Qualls SH(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Colorado Colorado Springs, Colorado
Springs, CO, USA.
(2)University of Colorado - Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)Gerontology Center, University of Colorado Colorado Springs, Colorado Springs,
CO, USA.

Objectives: Sense of community (SOC) is a comprehensive psychological assessment 
of the relationship between person and place and relates to positive
psychological outcomes in community-living adults, but has not been tested in
assisted living (AL). This study describes SOC, identifies associated factors,
and explores the relationship between SOC and psychological well-being with a
sample of AL residents.Method: Participants included 202 residents of 21 ALs. The
Brief Sense of Community Scale, a multidimensional theory-based measure, assessed
total SOC (Cronbach's α = .87; M = 25.89, SD = 6.08) and dimensions of SOC (i.e. 
need fulfillment, group membership, influence, and emotional connection).Results:
A second-order confirmatory factor analysis supported the multidimensional
theoretical framework of SOC with the current sample. While bivariate
correlations and multiple regressions varied by dimension, social relationships, 
physical health, and decisional control in the move to AL consistently yielded
positive relationships with SOC factors. In the final step of a hierarchical
multiple regression, total SOC significantly related to psychological well-being 
(F(1, 192) = 7.92, p = .005); although, its contribution was small (3%) when
accounting for relevant covariates.Conclusion: Key findings suggest that the most
accepted framework of SOC with community-living adults can be applied to the AL
setting, but requires additional theoretical and empirical work. Findings also
provide preliminary support for the relationship between SOC and psychological
well-being. The authors discuss implications for future research and clinical
practice, including strategies to promote SOC for AL residents.

DOI: 10.1080/13607863.2019.1647133 
PMCID: PMC6989390 [Available on 2021-10-01]
PMID: 31359773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Pharm Sci. 2020 Jan;109(1):891-899. doi: 10.1016/j.xphs.2019.07.008. Epub 2019 
Jul 23.

A New Method Based on Electron Diffraction for Detecting Nanoparticles in
Injectable Medicines.

Gemmi M(1), Serravalle E(2), Roberti di Sarsina P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Nanotechnology Innovation@NEST, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia,
Piazza San Silvestro 12, Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: mauro.gemmi@iit.it.
(2)AsSIS, Associazione di Studi e Informazione sulla Salute, Via Firenze 8, Pisa,
Italy.
(3)Foundation for Salutogenesis, Viale della Repubblica 21, Bologna, Italy.

A new method for detecting and characterizing nanoparticles in an injectable
pharmaceutical solution is presented. The method is based on the simultaneous
use, on those nanoparticles that are crystalline, of three-dimensional electron
diffraction tomography and energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry. With
three-dimensional electron diffraction tomography, the unit cell and the crystal 
symmetry of the nanoparticles are determined, while with energy dispersive X-ray 
spectrometry, the chemical composition is derived. With these data, through an
inspection of a crystallographic database, it is possible to determine the
crystal phase of the nanoparticles. The knowledge of the crystal phase is a
valuable element for understanding the provenance and the formation of the
nanoparticles, helping the researcher in solving any quality control issue
related to the presence of nanoparticles in an injectable solution.

Copyright © 2020 American Pharmacists Association®. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xphs.2019.07.008 
PMID: 31348938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Youth Adolesc. 2019 Nov;48(11):2114-2124. doi: 10.1007/s10964-019-01086-z. Epub
2019 Jul 24.

Examining the Directionality Between Identity Development and Depressive Symptoms
Among Recently Immigrated Hispanic Adolescents.

Meca A(1)(2), Rodil JC(3), Paulson JF(3)(4), Kelley M(3)(4), Schwartz SJ(5),
Unger JB(6), Lorenzo-Blanco EI(7), Des Rosiers SE(8), Gonzales-Backen M(9),
Baezconde-Garbanati L(6), Zamboanga BL(10).

Author information: 
(1)Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA, USA. ameca@odu.edu.
(2)Virginia Consortium Program in Clinical Psychology, Norfolk, VA, USA.
ameca@odu.edu.
(3)Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA, USA.
(4)Virginia Consortium Program in Clinical Psychology, Norfolk, VA, USA.
(5)University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA.
(6)University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(7)University of Texas in Austin, Austin, TX, USA.
(8)Barry University, Miami Shores, FL, USA.
(9)Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA.
(10)Smith College, Northampton, MA, USA.

Although personal identity development has been conceptualized as a source of
psychological stability and protective against depressive symptoms among Hispanic
immigrants, there remains ambiguity regarding the directional relationship
between identity development and depression. To address this limitation, the
current study sought to establish directionality between identity development and
depressive symptoms. The sample consisted of 302 recent (<5 years) immigrant
Hispanic adolescents (53.3% boys; Mage = 14.51 years at baseline; SD = 0.88
years) from Miami and Los Angeles who participated in a longitudinal study. The
findings suggested a bidirectional relationship between identity and depressive
symptoms such that identity coherence negatively predicted depressive symptoms,
yet depressive symptoms also negatively predicted coherence and positively
predicted subsequent identity confusion. Findings not only provide further
evidence for the protective role of identity development during times of acute
cultural transitions, but also emphasize the need for research to examine how
depressive symptoms, and psychopathology more broadly, may interfere with
establishing a sense of self.

DOI: 10.1007/s10964-019-01086-z 
PMCID: PMC7456180
PMID: 31342229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Brain Behav. 2019 Sep;9(9):e01360. doi: 10.1002/brb3.1360. Epub 2019 Jul 24.

Is there a relationship between psychological factors and TMD?

Sójka A(1), Stelcer B(2), Roy M(1), Mojs E(2), Pryliński M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, Poznań University of Medical Sciences, Poznan,
Poland.
(2)Department of Clinical Psychology, Poznań University of Medical Sciences,
Poznan, Poland.

INTRODUCTION: Medical students are in a very demanding environment and are
affected by high degree of stress. High levels of anxiety can affect a student's 
academic performance and also increase the risk of other health-related problems.
This study aims to evaluate, thanks to the intensity of stress manifestations
(4DSQ) together with the sense of coherence (SOC), the prevalence of TMD and oral
parafunctions in students enrolled in the University of Medical Sciences.
Moreover, it aims to evaluate the relationship between the psychosocial
manifestations of stress and sense of coherence in relation to gender.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 324 students of Poznań University of Medical
Sciences participated in this study. Students were assessed using a three-part
questionnaire: one was to assess symptoms of TMD, the second part was 4DSQ, and
the third was a SOC Questionnaire.
RESULTS: About one-third of the students in this study presented symptoms of TMD 
and perceived more intensively symptoms of distress, anxiety, somatization, and
depression. They presented a higher level of somatic symptoms and a lower level
of Sense of Coherence than students without TMD symptoms.
CONCLUSION: There is a strong negative relationship between the sense of
coherence and the level of perceived distress, anxiety, somatization, and
depression. Female students attending Medical School showed a higher level of
somatization of stress but with a higher capacity to overcome challenges as
compared to men.

© 2019 The Authors. Brain and Behavior published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.1360 
PMCID: PMC7649956
PMID: 31339236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019 Jul 12;16(14). pii: E2483. doi:
10.3390/ijerph16142483.

Sense of Coherence and Connectedness to Nature as Predictors of Motivation for
Practicing Karate.

Lipowski M(1), Krokosz D(2), Łada A(3), Sližik M(4), Pasek M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Tourism and Recreation, Gdansk University of Physical Education and
Sport, 80-336 Gdansk, Poland. mariusz.lipowski@awf.gda.pl.
(2)Faculty of Tourism and Recreation, Gdansk University of Physical Education and
Sport, 80-336 Gdansk, Poland.
(3)Institute of Psychology, University of Gdansk, 80-309 Gdansk, Poland.
(4)Department of Physical Education and Sports, Matej Bel University, 974 01
Banská Bystrica, Slovakia.

Background: Physical activity yields exceptionally positive results when it takes
place out in the open air, in contact with nature. Both contact with nature and
practicing sport constitute a certain kind of philosophy of life and living by
its rules plays a vital role in positive mental health-understood as maintaining 
a high sense of coherence. Martial arts are examples of sports that are rooted in
a philosophy. The goal of this study was to explore the links between a sense of 
coherence and connectedness to nature in the context of motivations for
practicing karate. Methods: A total of 127 practitioners of karate were examined 
using the Inventory of Physical Activity Objectives (IPAO), the Sense of
Coherence Questionnaire, and the Connectedness to Nature Scale. Results: The most
important objective for women training karate was a fit, shapely body, and for
men the most important objective was physical fitness. Connectedness to nature
had the strongest positive relationship with the measure of physical fitness (in 
both genders). A sense of comprehensibility increased men's motivational
conflict, whereas, in women, this IPAO dimension was positively related to
feeling emotionally connected to the natural world. Connectedness to nature was
related to motivational conflict positively in women and negatively in men.
Feeling emotionally connected to the natural world correlated with a sense of
comprehensibility, a sense of manageability, and a sense of meaningfulness. Sense
of comprehensibility and sense of meaningfulness tended to increase with age.
Conclusions: Understanding both the natural environment and the utility of
setting sport-related goals led to increasing one's efforts on the way to both
successes and defeats, and, most of all, overcoming one's weaknesses.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph16142483 
PMCID: PMC6679013
PMID: 31336837  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Soc Sci Med. 2019 Sep;236:112425. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.112425. Epub 2019
Jul 16.

Cultural engagement and mental health: Does socio-economic status explain the
association?

Fancourt D(1), Steptoe A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Behavioural Science and Health, University College London, UK.
Electronic address: d.fancourt@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Behavioural Science and Health, University College London, UK.

There is a growing body of literature suggesting that the arts can support mental
health. However, both arts participation and cultural engagement are unevenly
patterned across the population, with a strong social gradient. This social
gradient is also evident in mental health. So it remains unclear whether the
relationship between arts engagement and mental health can in fact be explained
by socio-economic status (SES). This study explores this question specifically in
relation to cultural engagement (e.g. visiting
museums/galleries/cinema/theatre/concerts) using data from 8780 adults aged
50 + from the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing. We used a statistical
triangulation approach, running three separate sets of analyses that each have
different strengths and address different statistical limitations or biases.
Using logistic regression, the relationship between cultural engagement and
mental health was still present when including covariates relating to SES, and
there was no evidence of moderation by SES either through the inclusion of
interaction terms or stratification. Using propensity score matching, matching
participants based on their SES, we also consistently found evidence of the
relationship. Finally, using fixed-effects regression which takes account of all 
time-invariant factors (which include multiple aspects of SES) even if
unobserved, we also found no attenuation of the relationship. Overall, this
confirms previous reports that cultural engagement is linked with a lower odds of
depression amongst adults aged 50 + by demonstrating a robust association in a
nationally-representative sample of older adults. While SES does explain around
half of the association between cultural engagement and depression, we found no
evidence that it either acts as a moderator or the main explanatory factor, with 
independent associations maintained across all three approaches. However, the
fact that higher SES is associated with more frequent engagement indicates that, 
in population terms, SES is still an important determinant of the salutogenic
impact of culture.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.112425 
PMCID: PMC6695288
PMID: 31336219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Complement Ther Med. 2019 Aug;45:280-288. doi: 10.1016/j.ctim.2019.04.007. Epub
2019 Apr 21.

Personal perception and body awareness of dysmenorrhea and the effects of
rhythmical massage therapy and heart rate variability biofeedback-A qualitative
study in the context of a randomized controlled trail.

Berger B(1), Böning A(2), Martin H(2), Fazeli A(2), Martin DD(3), Vagedes J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Chair of Medical Theory, Integrative and Anthroposophic Medicine,
Witten/Herdecke University, Germany.
(2)Tübingen University Children's Hospital, Germany.
(3)Chair of Medical Theory, Integrative and Anthroposophic Medicine,
Witten/Herdecke University, Germany; Tübingen University Children's Hospital,
Germany. Electronic address: David.martin@uni-wh.de.
(4)Tübingen University Children's Hospital, Germany; ARCIM-Institute,
Filderstadt, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose was to involve women's personal experiences of daily life 
with primary dysmenorrhea (PD) and their body perceptions of the
dysmenorrhea-related symptoms in relation to the treatment procedure and to
explore the perception of Heart Rate Variability Biofeedback (HRV-BF) or
Rhythmical Massage (RM) according to Ita Wegman as a therapeutic intervention
within the framework of Anthroposophic Medicine (AM).
DESIGN: From 60 women who participated in our randomized controlled trial
analyzing the effects of HRV-BF or RM, we examined 14 women to get an in-depth
understanding of this prevalent disease, using a qualitative design. The women
drew their body image before and after the 3-month-intervention on body
silhouette diagrams and described their body-perceptions. Semi-structured
interviews were conducted and analyzed using content analysis.
RESULTS: Women perceive dysmenorrhea as a disturbance of their daily lives. The
body images showed the variations of experience, from misbalances of body
perception to overwhelming attacks of pain hindering a normal life for several
days per month. Perception of therapeutic interventions range from relaxing
without effects on complaints to important changes and benefits on the physical, 
emotional, and/or social level. Both therapies can support stronger
self-awareness through enabling a more differentiated sense of body-awareness,
sometimes resulting in women experiencing fewer limitations in their daily lives.
Effects may be influenced by the readiness to resonate with the therapeutic
process. Qualitative interviews and body images can serve as tools to integrate
individuality and help to integrate embodied more or less conscious aspects of
complaints.
CONCLUSIONS: The body silhouette diagram could be used systematically to include 
reflections of embodiment in the therapeutic and research settings and help to
diagnose in advance the ability of participants to resonate with interventions.
RM and HRV-BF influence self-awareness and may enable salutogenic and
self-management capacities. For more effective treatment it may be helpful to
make treatment suggestions based on an integrative individual history that
includes preferences, expectations and a body silhouette diagram.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctim.2019.04.007 
PMID: 31331575  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Infant Ment Health J. 2019 Sep;40(5):659-672. doi: 10.1002/imhj.21804. Epub 2019 
Jul 18.

Look to Norway: Serving new families and infants in a multiethnic population.

Leirbakk MJ(1), Magnus JH(2), Torper J(3), Zeanah P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University of Oslo, Norway and City of Oslo,
Agency for Health.
(2)Section for Leadership, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway and Tulane School of 
Public Health and Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.
(3)Department for Health and Social Services, City of Oslo, Norway.
(4)Picard Center, College of Nursing, University of Louisiana, Lafayette,
Louisiana, USA.

Despite recognition that immigrant women face significant health challenges,
addressing the healthcare needs of immigrants is a source of debate in the United
States. Lack of adequate healthcare for immigrants is recognized as a social
justice issue, and other countries have incorporated immigrants into their
healthcare services. Oslo, the fastest growing capital in Europe, is rapidly
shifting to a heterogeneous society prompting organizational action and change.
The New Families Program serves first-time mothers and their infants in an Oslo
district serving 53% minorities from 142 countries. Anchored in salutogenic
theory, the program aims to support the parent-child relationship, children's
development and social adaptation, and to prevent stress-related outcomes.
Formative research has informed the successful program development and
implementation within the existing maternal and child healthcare service.
Implications for addressing maternal and child health needs of an immigrant
population are presented.

Publisher: A pesar de reconocerse que las mujeres inmigrantes enfrentan
significativos retos en cuanto a salud, las discusiones sobre las necesidades de 
cuidado de salud de inmigrantes es fuente de debate en Estados Unidos. La falta
de un adecuado sistema de cuidado de salud para inmigrantes es identificado como 
un asunto de justicia social y otros países han incorporado a los inmigrantes
dentro de sus servicios de cuidado de salud. Oslo, la capital europea con mayor
crecimiento, está pasando rápidamente a ser una sociedad heterogénea lo cual
conlleva acción y cambios organizacionales. El programa las Nuevas Familias ayuda
a madres primerizas y sus infantes en un distrito de Oslo que sirve a un 53% de
grupos minoritarios de 142 países. Basado en la teoría salutogénica, el programa 
se propone apoyar la relación madre-niño, el desarrollo y la adaptación social de
los niños, así como prevenir resultados relacionados con el estrés. La
investigación formativa es la base del éxito del desarrollo e implementación del 
programa dentro del existente servicio de cuidado de salud materno e infantil. Se
presentan las implicaciones para discutir las necesidades de salud
materno-infantiles de una población inmigrante.Publisher: Bien qu'il soit reconnu
que les femmes immigrées font face à des défis de santé importants, le fait de
considérer les besoins de santé des immigrés est une source de débat aux
Etats-Unis. Le manque de soins de santé pour les immigrés est reconnu comme étant
une question de justice sociale et d'autres pays ont incorporé les immigrés dans 
leurs services médicaux. Oslo, en Norvège, la capitale européenne qui grandit le 
plus vite, est rapidement en train d’évoluer vers une société hétérogène exigeant
une action organisationnelle et des changements. Le programme des Nouvelles
Familles sert des mères étant mères pour la première fois et leurs nourrissons
dans une partie de la ville d'Oslo qui contient 53% de minorités venues de 142
pays. Ancré dans une théorie de salutogénèse, ce programme a pour but de soutenir
la relation parent-enfant, le développement des enfants et leur adaptation
sociale, et de prévenir des résultats liés au stress. Des recherches formatives
ont influencé le succès du développement du programme ainsi que sa mise en place 
au sein d'un service de soins maternels et de l'enfant existant déjà. Les
implications concernant l'approche des besoins de santé pour les mères et les
enfants de cette population immigrée sont présentées.Publisher: Ungeachtet der
Erkenntnis, dass Migrantinnen mit erheblichen gesundheitlichen Herausforderungen 
konfrontiert sind, ist die Adressierung der Bedürfnisse von Einwanderern ein
Diskussionsthema in den USA. Der Mangel an angemessener Gesundheitsversorgung für
Einwanderer gilt als Problem der sozialen Gerechtigkeit, und andere Länder haben 
Einwanderer in ihre Gesundheitsdienste aufgenommen. Oslo, die am schnellsten
wachsende Hauptstadt Europas, wandelt sich zunehmend in eine heterogene
Gesellschaft, die organisatorisches Handeln und Veränderungen erfordert. Das „New
Families Program“ richtet sich an Erstmütter und deren Kleinkinder in einem
Osloer Stadtteil, der 53% der Minderheiten aus 142 Ländern einschließt. Verankert
in der Theorie der Salutogenese, zielt das Programm darauf ab, die
Eltern-Kind-Beziehung, die kindliche Entwicklung und soziale Anpassung zu
unterstützen und stressbedingte Folgen zu verhindern. Die Grundlagenforschung hat
die erfolgreiche Entwicklung und Umsetzung des Programms innerhalb des
bestehenden Gesundheitssystems für Mütter und Kinder geprägt. Es werden
Implikationen für das Adressieren der gesundheitlichen Bedürfnisse von Müttern
und Kindern einer immigrierten Bevölkerung vorgestellt.Publisher: ノルウェーを見つめて:
多民族集団における新しい家族と乳幼児にサービスを提供する
移民女性は著しい健康に関する難問に直面しているにもかかわらず、アメリカ合衆国において、移民の健康管理の必要性に取り組むことは議論の素である。移民の十分な健康管理の
欠如は、社会的公正の問題とみなされ、他国では、移民はその地の健康管理サービスに組み入れられる。ヨーロッパにおいて最も人口が増えている首都オスロは、急速に組織の行動
と変化を促す多元社会へと変化しているところである。ニュー・ファミリープログラムは、初めての母親とその乳幼児に行なわれるもので、オスロ地域では142の国から来た53
％の少数派に実施されている。健康生成理論に基づいて、プログラムは親子関係、子どもの発達、社会的適応を支援し、ストレス関連の結果を予防するのがねらいである。基礎調査
は、現存する母子保健管理サービス内での成功したプログラムの進歩と実行を報じた。移民層の母子保健の必要性に取り組むことの意味を述べる。.Publisher:
看看挪威:為多民族人口提供新的家庭和嬰兒服務 儘管認識到移民婦女面臨重大的健康挑戰,
但解決移民的醫療保健需求在美國仍有爭論。移民缺乏足夠的醫療保健被認為是一個社會公義問題, 其他國家已將移民納入其醫療保健服務。奧斯陸是歐洲發展最快的首都,
正在迅速變成多元化的社會, 促使組織行動和改變。新家庭計劃為奧斯陸地區的首次母親及其嬰兒提供服務,
為來自142個國家的53％少數民族提供服務。該計劃以致敬理論為基礎, 旨在支持親子關係丶兒​​童發展和社會適應, 並預防與壓力相關的結果。這個形成性研究,
為現有的母嬰保健服務中的成功項目開發和實施提供了信息。並討論解決移民人口的母嬰健康需求。.Publisher: نظرة إلى النرويج: خدمة
الأسر الجديدة والرضع في مجتمع سكني متعدد الأعراق على الرغم من الاعتراف بأن
المهاجرات يواجهن تحديات صحية كبيرة، فإن تلبية احتياجات الرعاية الصحية للمهاجرين
هي مصدر نقاش في الولايات المتحدة، ويُعترف بعدم توفر الرعاية الصحية الكافية
للمهاجرين كقضية عدالة اجتماعية، وهناك بلدان أخرى أدمجت المهاجرين في خدمات الرعاية
الصحية الخاصة بهم. على سبيل المثال أوسلو، وهي أسرع عاصمة نموا في أوروبا، تتحول
بسرعة إلى مجتمع غير متجانس يدفع إلى اتخاذ إجراءات تنظيمية وتغيير. يخدم برنامج
الأسر الجديدة لأول مرة الأمهات وأطفالهن الرضع في منطقة أوسلو التي تخدم 53% من
الأقليات من 142 دولة. ويهدف البرنامج، الذي يرتكز على نظرية الصحة، إلى دعم العلاقة
بين الوالدين والطفل، ونمو الأطفال والتكيف الاجتماعي، ومنع النتائج المتعلقة
بالإجهاد. وقد استرشدت البحوث التكوينية بنجاح تطوير وتنفيذ البرامج في إطار خدمات
الرعاية الصحية للأمهات والأطفال القائمة. وتعرض الدراسة التطبيقات التي تتناول
تلبية احتياجات صحة الأم والطفل في مجتمع المهاجرين.
© 2019 Michigan Association for Infant Mental Health.

DOI: 10.1002/imhj.21804 
PMCID: PMC6973293
PMID: 31318444  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Psychiatr Pol. 2019 Apr 30;53(2):419-432. doi: 10.12740/PP/94382. Epub 2019 Apr
30.

General health, sense of coherence and coping styles in parents participating in 
Workshops for Parents of Hyperactive Children.

[Article in English, Polish]

Pisula A(1), Bryńska A(1), Wójtowicz S(2), Srebnicki T(1), Wolańczyk T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Warszawski Uniwersytet Medyczny, Klinika Psychiatrii Wieku Rozwojowego.
(2)Warszawski Uniwersytet Medyczny, Zakład Psychologii i Komunikacji Medycznej.

OBJECTIVES: The assessment of changes in the general health, sense of coherence
and stress coping styles in parents of children and adolescents with ADHD,
participating in 12-week Workshops for Parents of Hyperactive Children.
METHODS: The experimental group included 186 mothers and 139 fathers (parents of 
199 children); the reference group included 23 mothers and 19 fathers (parents of
24 children), attending 1-2 standard medical visits within a 12-week period
(treatment as usual). Parents from both groups were assessed twice using (1) the 
General Health Questionnaire (GHQ), (2) the Life Orientation Questionnaire
(SOC-29), and (3) the Coping Inventory for Stressful Situations (CISS).
RESULTS: (1) The experimental group showed a significant improvement in the
severity of somatic symptoms and anxiety/insomnia in mothers and the general
well-being of mothers and fathers. We observed the influence of workshops on
manageability and reduction of the emotion-oriented coping in mothers; (2) the
participation in the workshops was associated with a statistically significant
effect (mostly moderate) in relation to general health of mothers, while TAU was 
mostly associated with a low or insignificant effect.
CONCLUSIONS: The assessed form of interventions improves the functioning of
parents of children with ADHD.

DOI: 10.12740/PP/94382 
PMID: 31317967  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Psychiatr Pol. 2019 Apr 30;53(2):313-324. doi: 10.12740/PP/81447. Epub 2019 Apr
30.

Social support and sense of life in patients with anxiety disorders - preliminary
report.

[Article in English, Polish]

Kroplewski Z(1), Serocka A(1), Szcześniak M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Uniwersytet Szczeciński, Instytut Psychologii.

OBJECTIVES: Verification of the level of social support perception and sense of
life in patients with anxiety disorder and healthy people; evaluation of the
relationship between these variables.
METHODS: The Social Support Questionnaire short version (F-SozU K-22) by G.
Sommer and T. Fydrich and the Life Attitude Profile (LAP-R) by G.T. Reker were
used.
RESULTS: Social support and its dimensions prove to be significantly lower in
patients with anxiety disorders. Healthy individuals have a higher sense of
purpose, greater internal coherence, control of life, personal sense and balance 
of life attitudes, and lower intensity of existential emptiness. Higher emotional
support and older age increase the level of sense of life in people with anxiety 
disorders.
CONCLUSIONS: For preventive and therapeutic purposes, it is important to develop 
and sustain the internal resources of the individual (sense of life and
age-related experience). In patients with neurotic disorders, it also seems
essential to use psychotherapy aimed at changing the patterns of personality that
impede them from building social support networks. This is due to the fact that
anxiety disorders are often characterized by lower confidence, avoidance of
interpersonal relationships, falsified perception of social support, leading thus
to distorted interpretation of supportive actions.

DOI: 10.12740/PP/81447 
PMID: 31317960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Contemp Oncol (Pozn). 2019;23(2):110-114. doi: 10.5114/wo.2019.85883. Epub 2019
Jun 13.

Predictors of stress in close relatives supporting patients with leukaemia.

Kaczmarska-Tabor A(1), Wrona-Polańska H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Social Sciences, University of Economy, Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(2)Department of Applied Psychology, Institute of Educational Sciences,
Pedagogical University of Cracow, Poland.

Aim of the study: The aim of the study was to determine the psychological factors
that will help reduce the level of stress in people supporting leukaemia
patients.
Material and methods: The study group consisted of 100 close relatives supporting
leukaemia patients (66 women and 34 men). The study included close relatives who 
supported patients with the diagnosis of leukaemia. A standardized interview and 
the questionnaires CISS, SES, SOC-29, STAI, and the Questionnaire of Perceived
Control of Life were used in the study.
Results: The research results show that 65% of the respondents indicate the
illness of a close relative as the main source of stress. Among the respondents, 
the emotion-oriented style (β = 0.301, p = 0.008) and anxious personality (β =
0.560, p = 0.000) proved to be predictors of stress. Stress is counteracted by a 
sense of coherence (β = -0.294, p = 0.028).
Conclusions: In respect of struggling with stress by people supporting leukaemia 
patients, releasing accumulated tension and formulating negative emotions are the
key issues. The strengthening of the sense of coherence will also be crucial.

DOI: 10.5114/wo.2019.85883 
PMCID: PMC6630392
PMID: 31316294 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


80. Psychother Psychosom Med Psychol. 2020 Feb;70(2):86-93. doi: 10.1055/a-0901-7054.
Epub 2019 Jul 17.

[Psychometric Evaluation and Norm Values of an Ultra-Short Version of the Sense
of Coherence Scale "SOC-3"].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Schmalbach B(1)(2), Tibubos AN(2), Zenger M(3)(4), Hinz A(5), Brähler E(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Psychologie, WWU Münster.
(2)Klinik und Poliklinik für Psychosomatische Medizin und Psychotherapie,
Universitätsmedizin der Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz.
(3)Fachbereich Angewandte Humanwissenschaften, Hochschule Magdeburg-Stendal.
(4)Integriertes Forschungs- und Behandlungszentrum (IFB)AdipositasErkrankungen - 
Verhaltensmedizin, Abteilung für Medizinische Psychologie und Medizinische
Soziologie, Universitätsmedizin Leipzig.
(5)Abteilung für Medizinische Psychologie und Medizinische Soziologie,
Universität Leipzig.

Sense of coherence is a psychological resource which contributes substantially to
an individual's ability to cope well with stressful situations. In the present
study we investigate an ultra-short form of the Sense of Coherence Scale (SOC-3) 
in a representative sample of the German general population (N=2.018). The 3-item
model evinced excellent model fit qualities and acceptable reliability. We
present evidence for partial strict invariance across sex and age groups. In
terms of construct validity, our analyses demonstrate strong overlap between the 
SOC-3 and two longer versions (-9 and -29). In addition, correlations to related 
constructs such as attachment styles, physical and mental health, as well as
quality of life were similar between the SOC versions. For the first time,
normative values for the German population are presented to allow for the
classification of individual scores. We recommend the SOC-3 as a screener for
applied sciences and for large-scale surveys in particular.

Publisher: Kohärenzsinn ist eine psychische Ressource, die maßgeblich zu einem
adaptiven Coping im Umgang mit belastenden Situationen beiträgt. In der
vorliegenden Studie untersuchen wir eine Ultrakurzform der Sense of Coherence
Scale (SOC-3) in einer repräsentativen Stichprobe der deutschen Bevölkerung
(N=2.018). Das 3-Item-Modell wies exzellente Gütekriterien sowie eine akzeptable 
Reliabilität auf. Über Altersgruppen und Geschlecht konnte partielle strikte
Messinvarianz des Modells nachgewiesen werden. In Bezug auf Konstruktvalidität
demonstrierten unsere Analysen starke Überschneidungen der SOC-3 mit längeren
SOC-Versionen (−9 und−29). Analog zu den SOC-Langversionen wurden
erwartungsgemäße Zusammenhänge der SOC-3 mit verwandten Konstrukten wie
Bindungstypen, körperlicher und mentaler Gesundheit und Lebenszufriedenheit
repliziert. Erstmalig werden Normwerte der SOC-3 für die deutsche Bevölkerung
präsentiert, um die Einordnung individueller Scores zu ermöglichen. Wir empfehlen
die SOC-3 als Screener für angewandte Forschung und insbesondere für Befragungen 
mit großen Stichproben.
© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-0901-7054 
PMID: 31315141  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Die Autoren geben an, dass kein
Interessenkonflikt besteht.


81. Memory. 2019 Oct;27(9):1214-1223. doi: 10.1080/09658211.2019.1642919. Epub 2019
Jul 15.

Narrative self and high risk for schizophrenia: remembering the past and
imagining the future.

Hazan H(1), Reese EJ(1), Linscott RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Psychology, University of Otago , Dunedin , New Zealand.

We examined the narrative self of those at high psychometric risk for
schizophrenia (HR). Eighty undergraduate students wrote personal narratives about
a turning-point event in their life, and about a possible future. The
turning-point narratives were coded for topic, specificity, event valence,
valence of causal coherence link, overall level of causal coherence, and agency. 
The future narratives were coded for the number and valence of goals, topic of
goals, and specificity of goals. Word count was applied to all narratives. The HR
group expressed lower levels of agency and a trend of lower levels of causal
coherence when narrating turning-point events. When imagining their futures, HR
participants produced shorter narratives and showed a trend of having fewer
goals. Including the dimensions of both the turning point and the future
narratives revealed that the HR group membership was best predicted by lower
levels of agency and of causal coherence in the turning-point narrative, and
fewer words in the future narrative. Narratives differed specifically in those
few elements that are critical for the achievement of narrative continuity.
Consistent with the theory, people at high risk for schizophrenia already
present, to some extent, an impoverishment in their narrative sense of self.

DOI: 10.1080/09658211.2019.1642919 
PMID: 31307283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. BMC Cancer. 2019 Jul 10;19(1):678. doi: 10.1186/s12885-019-5895-7.

Disclosure in lesbian, gay and bisexual cancer care: towards a salutogenic
healthcare environment.

Fish J(1), Williamson I(2), Brown J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for LGBTQ Research, De Montfort University, The Gateway, Leicester, LE1
9BH, UK. jfish@dmu.ac.uk.
(2)Division of Psychology, De Montfort University, Leicester, LE1 9BH, UK.
(3)Leicester Academy for the Study of Ageing (LASA) The Leicester School of
Nursing and Midwifery, De Montfort University, The Gateway, Leicester, LE1 9BH,
UK.

BACKGROUND: The literature on sexual orientation disclosure is arguably one of
the most developed in the field of lesbian, gay and bisexual (LGB) people in
healthcare in English speaking countries however, relatively little research has 
been conducted into disclosure in cancer care. Studies have been mainly
undertaken in primary care where distinct circumstances pertain and where the
benefits of disclosure include obtaining appropriate health information,
treatment advice and avoiding misdiagnosis.
METHODS: We conducted an in-depth qualitative study primarily recruiting patients
through oncology care in hospital settings and through LGB community cancer
support groups. Data were gathered through semi-structured interviews with 30 LGB
patients with different cancer types.
RESULTS: Data were analysed using thematic analysis and interpreted and
interrogated through salutogenesis theory which offers a useful lens through
which to consider the health promoting effects of sexual orientation disclosure
in cancer care. We present three themes as part of the analysis: Authenticity as 
a driver for disclosure in cancer care, Partners as a (potential) salutogenic
resource and Creating safe, healing environments conducive to disclosure. The
findings are reported and discussed in relation to three inter-related concepts
from current salutogenesis theorising including a sense of coherence, generalised
resistance resources and healing environments which can facilitate sexual
orientation disclosure.
CONCLUSION: Our findings enable a more nuanced approach to understanding
disclosure in this context. This study contributes to the literature through its 
articulation of the salutogenic potential of disclosure (if responded to
appropriately) for LGB patients as individuals, in relationship to their partners
or carers and the role of creating a visible healing-oriented optimal environment
to promote quality of life and recovery.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-019-5895-7 
PMCID: PMC6617610
PMID: 31291940  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Psychosoc Oncol. 2019 Sep-Oct;37(5):616-635. doi:
10.1080/07347332.2019.1631931. Epub 2019 Jul 5.

Protective factors of depressive symptoms in adult cancer patients: The role of
sense of coherence and posttraumatic growth in different time spans since
diagnosis.

Aderhold C(1), Morawa E(1), Paslakis G(1), Erim Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University Hospital of
Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU) , Erlangen ,
Germany.

Purpose: The purpose of this study was to investigate the impact of posttraumatic
growth (PTG) and sense of coherence (SOC) as protective factors on depressive
symptoms at different time spans after cancer diagnosis. Design: In a
cross-sectional study, adult cancer patients were recruited from the tumor
clinics of the University Hospital in Erlangen (Germany) and from peer-support
groups for cancer survivors. Sample: Participants included 157 adult patients
with primary cancer or in remission (53.5% female; mean age: 58.0 ± 14.1 years;
mean time since diagnosis: 46.7 ± 72.8 months) with various forms of cancer.
Methods: Multiple linear regression analyses were conducted. The patients were
divided into two groups (≤1 year and >1 year since diagnosis) to test the impact 
of PTG and SOC on depressive symptoms at different time intervals after
diagnosis. The Posttraumatic Growth Inventory (PTGI), Sense of Coherence Scale
(SOC-13), and Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) were applied.
Findings: After controlling for major demographic and clinical variables, SOC (β 
= -.489, p < .001) was found to be the only significant predictor for depressive 
symptoms ≤ 1 year after diagnosis; >1 year after diagnosis, SOC (β = -.571, p <
.001), PTG (β = -.318, p = .002), and metastatic cancer (β = .231, p = .023) were
significant predictors of depressive symptoms (high levels of SOC as well as PTG,
and having no metastatic cancer were associated with low manifestations of
depressive symptoms). Conclusions: These findings suggest that SOC may be a
protective factor against depressive symptoms in both the short as well as in the
long term after cancer diagnosis, but PTG only in the long term. Implications for
psychosocial providers or policy: To prevent the development of depressive
symptoms in cancer patients, individuals with a low SOC should be detected and
should receive psychological assistance.

DOI: 10.1080/07347332.2019.1631931 
PMID: 31272341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Methods Mol Biol. 2019;2013:29-44. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9550-9_2.

Current Situation of Malaria in Africa.

Mbacham WF(1), Ayong L(2), Guewo-Fokeng M(3), Makoge V(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science, University of Yaoundé 1, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
wfmbacham@yahoo.com.
(2)Malaria Research Unit, Centre Pasteur du Cameroun, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Yaoundé 1,
Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(4)Institute of Medical Research and Medicinal Plants Studies (IMPM), Ministry of
Scientific Research and Innovation, Yaoundé, Cameroon.

Malaria infection is one of the major causes of deaths in the African continent. 
The high burden of malaria in Africa is due to P. falciparum, which adapts and
cospecializes with Anopheles gambiae, the most effective and widespread malaria
vector. Since 2000, the incidence of malaria has been reduced by 17% and malaria 
mortality rates by 26%. However, the rate of decline has stalled and even
reversed in some regions since 2014. In 2017 as described by the latest World
malaria report, 219 million malaria cases were reported, up from 2017 million
cases reported in 2016 in 91 countries, and the global tally of malaria deaths
reached 435,000 deaths, compared with 451,000 estimated deaths in 2016. Despite
these achievements, the African region continues to account for about 92% of
malaria cases and deaths worldwide. Therefore, it is important to master the
current situation of malaria in Africa to see how to better plan its elimination.
In this chapter, we present the current situation and prospective means to
improve it, including a salutogenesis approach.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9550-9_2 
PMID: 31267491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2019 Jul 1;17(1):113. doi: 10.1186/s12955-019-1174-1.

Gastrointestinal symptoms - an illness burden that affects daily work in patients
with IBS.

Faresjö Å(1), Walter S(2), Norlin AK(3), Faresjö T(3), Jones MP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Health, Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Linköping University, SE-581 83, Linköping, Sweden.
ashild.olsen.faresjo@liu.se.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Division of
Gastroenterology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Linköping University, 
Linköping, Sweden.
(3)Department of Medicine and Health, Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Linköping University, SE-581 83, Linköping, Sweden.
(4)Psychology Department, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) is a chronic gastrointestinal disorder
characterised by recurrent abdominal pain and disturbed bowel habits and unclear 
aetiology. IBS is also associated with psychosocial factors, impaired quality of 
life and lost work productivity. This study sought to determine whether the
association between IBS and lost work productivity might be accounted for by poor
coping strategies and loss of confidence in the healthcare system.
METHODS: Case-control design was employed sampling IBS and non-gastrointestinal
(non-GI) primary healthcare seekers in a defined region in Sweden. Non-GI
patients were of similar age and sex distribution to the IBS patients.
Questionnaires applied in this study included instruments designed to measure
confidence in the social security system and in the community, as well as
questions about whether gastrointestinal problems might affect working life and
Sense of coherence (SOC) questionnaire. The study's primary hypothesis was
evaluated via an a priori path model.
RESULTS: Statistically significant differences were found between IBS cases
(n = 305) and controls (n = 369) concerning abdominal pain or discomfort
affecting everyday performance at work (p <  0.0001). IBS cases also showed
significantly lower (p = 0.001) confidence in public healthcare. The study's
hypothesis was supported with the finding of a statistically significant indirect
association via poor coping strategies, although the indirect associations were
lesser in magnitude than the direct association.
CONCLUSIONS: This study found a clear association between clinically diagnosed
IBS status and interference in work by gastrointestinal symptoms in which sense
of coherence might be of importance.

DOI: 10.1186/s12955-019-1174-1 
PMCID: PMC6604450
PMID: 31262316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Inquiry. 2019 Jan-Dec;56:46958019859810. doi: 10.1177/0046958019859810.

Factors Associated With Mental Health Status Among Older Primary Caregivers in
Japan.

Ninomiya S(1), Tabuchi K(1), Rahman MM(1), Kobayashi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Hiroshima University, Japan.

This study aimed to elucidate factors affecting the mental health status of older
primary caregivers. Participants comprised 81 pairs of home care recipients aged 
≥65 years and primary caregivers aged ≥65 years who were caring for the
recipients. We used an individual interview method, which covered basic
attributes, activities of daily living by Barthel Index, mental health status by 
Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D), sense of coherence
(SOC), and sense of care burden by Japanese version of the Zarit Burden Interview
(J-ZBI). The score for the comprehensibility subscale of the SOC was
significantly higher for the old-old caregivers compared with the young-old
caregivers (P < .01). A significant positive correlation between the number of
years of caregiving and the score for the SOC meaningfulness subscale was seen
for the young-old caregivers (P < .05). For the old-old caregivers alone,
negative correlations were seen between the CES-D score and the scores for all
the SOC items. Multiple linear regression analysis using CES-D as the dependent
variable showed a significant positive relationship to J-ZBI in all caregivers (P
< .01). In contrast, a significant negative relationship was seen with
meaningfulness, an SOC subscale only for the old-old caregivers. Meaningfulness
as well as J-ZBI was extracted as a factor affecting the mental health status of 
the old-old caregivers, suggesting that higher SOC relates to lower stress levels
with a remarkable decline in physical condition. Meaningfulness, an SOC subscale,
is an important factor for improving the mental health of old-old caregivers.

DOI: 10.1177/0046958019859810 
PMCID: PMC6600495
PMID: 31253056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019 Jun 24;16(12). pii: E2229. doi:
10.3390/ijerph16122229.

The Potential Psychological Mechanism of Subjective Well-Being in Migrant
Workers: A Structural Equation Models Analysis.

Chen H(1), Wang L(2)(3), Wei Y(4), Ye B(5), Dai J(6), Gao J(7), Wang F(8), Fu
H(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine and Health Education, School of Public
Health, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. haochen18@fudan.edu.cn.
(2)Department of Preventive Medicine and Health Education, School of Public
Health, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. leiwang16@fudan.edu.cn.
(3)Department of Clinical Nursing, School of Nursing and Health Management,
Shanghai University of Medicine & Health Sciences, Shanghai 201318, China.
leiwang16@fudan.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Preventive Medicine and Health Education, School of Public
Health, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. clili17@163.com.
(5)Department of Preventive Medicine and Health Education, School of Public
Health, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. yb_iyx1314@163.com.
(6)Department of Preventive Medicine and Health Education, School of Public
Health, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. jmdai@fudan.edu.cn.
(7)Department of Preventive Medicine and Health Education, School of Public
Health, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. jlgao@fudan.edu.cn.
(8)Department of Politics, School of Humanities and Social Science, East China
Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China. wangfan512@126.com.
(9)Department of Preventive Medicine and Health Education, School of Public
Health, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. hfu@fudan.edu.cn.

Objective: The aim of this study was to identify the potential psychological
mechanism of well-being in migrants in Shanghai, China. Methods: A
cross-sectional study was conducted in 2018. First, a literature review was
conducted to understand the salutogenesis of migrants in China. Then, 2573 random
participants were recruited from six workplaces and public places in six
districts of Shanghai. The Chinese versions of the Patient Health Questionnaire-9
(PHQ-9), the Personal Wellbeing Index (PWI), and the Sense of Coherence (SOC)
Scale were used to evaluate the depression, subjective well-being (SWB), and SOC 
of migrants. The t-test, ANOVA, and multiple linear regression and structural
equation models (SEM) were used to analyze the correlations and paths among
generalized resistant resources (GRRs), SOC, PHQ, and SWB. Results: The subjects 
were aged between 18 and 58 (mean, 28.17; SD, 6.99). SOC showed a positive
correlation with SWB (r = 0.46, p < 0.001) and a negative correlation to PHQ (r =
-0.53, p < 0.001). After controlling for the demographic characteristics, we
found that PHQ, SOC (comprehensibility, manageability, meaningfulness), and GRRs 
(income ratio, marital status) contributed 33.3% of the variance in SWB, and
their linear regression coefficients were: -0.32 (p < 0.001), 0.09 (p < 0.001),
0.09 (p < 0.001), 0.15 (p < 0.001), 0.06 (p < 0.05), and 0.16 (p < 0.05),
respectively. These findings not only confirmed the direct association among SOC,
PHQ and SWB, but also verified two underlying mechanisms regarding the mediating 
effect of SOC by using SEM: (1) GRRs (income ratio, marital status) are
positively associated with a higher SOC, which further contributes to favorable
SWB; and (2) PHQ is negatively associated with poor SWB indirectly via SOC.
Conclusion: Migrant workers with low SOC and high PHQ are vulnerable to poor
well-being levels. Meanwhile, GRRs (income ratio, marital status) may strengthen 
the SOC level, and can be regarded as the basis of intervention. Further
investigation may be needed to focus on external psychological support factors.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph16122229 
PMCID: PMC6617093
PMID: 31238592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


88. Medicina (Kaunas). 2019 Jun 24;55(6). pii: E303. doi: 10.3390/medicina55060303.

Psychotherapy with Suicidal Patients: The Integrative Psychodynamic Approach of
the Boston Suicide Study Group.

Schechter M(1)(2), Ronningstam E(3)(4), Herbstman B(5)(6), Goldblatt MJ(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)North Shore Medical Center, 81 Highland Avenue, Salem MA 01970, USA.
mschechter@partners.org.
(2)Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
mschechter@partners.org.
(3)Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
ronningstam@email.com.
(4)McLean Hospital, 115 Mill Street, Belmont, MA 02478, USA.
ronningstam@email.com.
(5)Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
bherbstman@mclean.harvard.edu.
(6)McLean Hospital, 115 Mill Street, Belmont, MA 02478, USA.
bherbstman@mclean.harvard.edu.
(7)Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
mark_goldblatt@hms.harvard.edu.
(8)McLean Hospital, 115 Mill Street, Belmont, MA 02478, USA.
mark_goldblatt@hms.harvard.edu.

Psychotherapy with suicidal patients is inherently challenging. Psychodynamic
psychotherapy focuses attention on the patient's internal experience through the 
creation of a therapeutic space for an open-ended exploration of thoughts, fears,
and fantasies as they emerge through interactive dialogue with an empathic
therapist. The Boston Suicide Study Group (M.S., M.J.G., E.R., B.H.), has
developed an integrative psychodynamic approach to psychotherapy with suicidal
patients based on the authors' extensive clinical work with suicidal patients
(over 100 years combined). It is fundamentally psychodynamic in nature, with an
emphasis on the therapeutic alliance, unconscious and implicit relational
processes, and the power of the therapeutic relationship to facilitate change in 
a long-term exploratory treatment. It is also integrative, however, drawing
extensively on ideas and techniques described in Dialectical Behavioral Therapy
(DBT), Mentalization Based Treatment (MBT), Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (CBT),
as well on developmental and social psychology research. This is not meant to be 
a comprehensive review of psychodynamic treatment of suicidal patients, but
rather a description of an integrative approach that synthesizes clinical
experience and relevant theoretical contributions from the literature that
support the authors' reasoning. There are ten key aspects of this integrative
psychodynamic treatment: 1. Approach to the patient in crisis; 2, instilling
hope; 3. a focus on the patient's internal affective experience; 4. attention to 
conscious and unconscious beliefs and fantasies; 5. improving affect tolerance;
6. development of narrative identity and modification of "relational scripts"; 7.
facilitation of the emergence of the patient's genuine capacities; 8. improving a
sense of continuity and coherence; 9 attention to the therapeutic alliance; 10.
attention to countertransference. The elements of treatment are overlapping and
not meant to be sequential, but each is discussed separately as an essential
aspect of the psychotherapeutic work. This integrative psychodynamic approach is 
a useful method for suicide prevention as it helps to instill hope, provides
relational contact and engages the suicidal patient in a process that leads to
positive internal change. The benefits of the psychotherapy go beyond crisis
intervention, and include the potential for improved affect tolerance, more
fulfilling relational experiences, emergence of previously warded off experience 
of genuine capacities, and a positive change in narrative identity.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina55060303 
PMCID: PMC6631841
PMID: 31238582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


89. J Adv Nurs. 2019 Nov;75(11):2766-2772. doi: 10.1111/jan.14137. Epub 2019 Jul 30.

The level of sense of coherence among Swedish nursing staff.

Eriksson M(1), Kerekes N(1), Brink P(1)(2), Pennbrant S(1), Nunstedt H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University West, Trollhättan, Sweden.
(2)NU Hospital Group, Trollhättan, Sweden.

AIM: To explore the level of sense of coherence among Swedish nursing staff.
DESIGN: An explorative quantitative study design was adopted using a short form
for measuring sense of coherence.
METHODS: Data were collected in January 2018 from nurses working in full-time
positions at two hospitals in Western Sweden. A total of 93 nurses completed the 
13 item questionnaire measuring sense of coherence. Descriptive statistics were
applied to obtain means and standard deviations. Spearman's rank correlation was 
used to describe strength of association between sense of coherence and
socio-demographic categories. Between-group differences were defined using the
nonparametric tests of Mann Whitney U test and Kruskal-Wallis test.
RESULTS: The internal consistency of the SOC-13 was low. An
inter-item-correlation test indicated that two items decreased the internal
consistency of the scale. The level of the three dimensions of sense of coherence
varied; manageability was weakest and decreased the total sense of coherence. The
meaningfulness dimension was as strongest.
CONCLUSION: On a national level, nurses reported weaker sense of coherence (SOC) 
than the general population, but stronger in an international comparison of
nurses. They found their work difficult to manage, but meaningful.
IMPACT: On a national level, the nurses reported weaker SOC than the general
population, but stronger in an international comparison of nurses. Findings from 
this study will have an impact on how nurses can manage work related stress in
terms of sense of coherence. There will also be an impact on nurses' well-being, 
which in a long run benefits patients.

Publisher: 目的: 探讨瑞典护理人员的一致感水平。 设计: 采用探索性的定量研究,并使用简易格式来测量一致感。 方法:
2018年1月,数据收集自瑞典西部两家医院的全职护士。共有93名护士完成了13项问卷,以测量其一致感。我们采用描述性研究来获取均值和标准差。我们使用Spearma
n的秩相关性来描述一致感和社会人口统计分类之间的关联强度。我们使用了曼-惠特尼U检验(Mann Whitney U
test)和克鲁斯卡尔-沃利斯检验(Kruskal-Wallis test)这样的非参数检验来定义组间差异。 结果:
SOC-13的内部一致感较低。项目内部相关测试表明,两个项目降低了量表的内部一致感。一致感三个维度的水平不同;可管理性是最弱的,降低了整体的一致感。有效性维度最强
。 结论: 从全国来看,护士的一致感(SOC)比普通人群弱,但从国际比较来看,护士的一致感更强。护士们发现他们的工作虽然难以管理,,但很有意义。 影响:
从全国来看,护士的一致感(SOC)比普通人群弱,但从国际比较来看,护士的一致感更强。此次研究结果将影响护士从一致感的角度来处理与工作相关的压力的方式。这也会对护士
的健康产生影响,从长远来看,这也能使患者受益。.
© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jan.14137 
PMID: 31236952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Midwifery. 2019 Oct;77:9-15. doi: 10.1016/j.midw.2019.06.006. Epub 2019 Jun 17.

Impact of sense of coherence and work values perception on stress and
self-reported health of midwives.

Gebriné KÉ(1), Lampek K(2), Sárváry A(3), Sárváry A(4), Takács P(5), Zrínyi M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Visitor Methodology and Public Health, Faculty of Health,
University of Debrecen, Nyíregyháza, Hungary. Electronic address:
eles.krisztina@foh.unideb.hu.
(2)Department of Health Promotion, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Pécs, Pécs, Hungary.
(3)Department of Psychology, Faculty of Health, University of Debrecen,
Nyíregyháza, Hungary.
(4)Department of Nursing Science, Faculty of Health, University of Debrecen,
Nyíregyháza, Hungary.
(5)Department of Health Informatics, Faculty of Health, University of Debrecen,
Nyíregyháza, Hungary.
(6)Drug Development Coordination Centre, University of Debrecen, Debrecen,
Hungary.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the research was to explore how sense of coherence (SOC)
and work values (WVs) impact on stress and perceived health of midwives. Sense of
coherence, by definition, reflects a person's view of life and capacity to
respond to stressful situations. A further goal was to evaluate the mediating
effect of WVs between stress and health.
DESIGN: A cross sectional, correlational design was used.
SETTING: Participants were randomly selected from 13 hospitals across Hungary.
PARTICIPANTS: The final sample included 228 midwives.
METHODS: Main measures included Sense of Coherence Questionnaire, stress subscale
from the Demand-Control-Support scale, Super's Work Values Inventory and
Subjective Health Test developed by the authors. Statistical analyses determined 
correlation coefficients, difference by independent t-test, and linear
regression.
FINDINGS: Participants reported high level of stress, showed average SOC and
subjective health. The most preferred work values were altruism (Mean = 12.40),
economic returns (Mean = 12.11) and supervisory relations (Mean = 11.99). SOC and
health were positively (r = 0.47, p < 0.001), while SOC and stress were
negatively associated (r = -0.36, p < 0.001). WVs indirectly mediated the
relationship between health and stress (r = -0.55, p < 0.001). Midwives who
worked less than 5 years in practice did not differ on health, stress, WVs and
SOC from those who had been working longer. Going from worst to best perceived
personal health increased intention to stay in midwifery by 32% in the linear
regression model.
KEY CONCLUSIONS: In this study we documented relatively greater levels of stress 
and average levels of health and SOC among midwives. This paper confirmed that
SOC had a positive impact on stress and health specifically for midwives.
Uniquely, work values indirectly influenced the relationship between stress and
health.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: Improving SOC and WVs advance the health of midwives
which will reduce the probability of leaving the profession.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.midw.2019.06.006 
PMID: 31233991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Health Promot Int. 2020 Apr 1;35(2):187-195. doi: 10.1093/heapro/daz057.

Future directions for the concept of salutogenesis: a position article.

Bauer GF(1), Roy M(2), Bakibinga P(3), Contu P(4), Downe S(5), Eriksson M(6),
Espnes GA(7), Jensen BB(8), Juvinya Canal D(9), Lindström B(7), Mana A(10),
Mittelmark MB(11), Morgan AR(12), Pelikan JM(13), Saboga-Nunes L(14), Sagy S(10),
Shorey S(15), Vaandrager L(16), Vinje HF(17).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Salutogenesis, Institute of Epidemiology, Biostatistics, Prevention,
University of Zurich, Hirschengraben 84, 8001 Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Family Medicine and Emergency Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, University of Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec J1H 5N4, Canada.
(3)Health Challenges and Systems Research Program, African Population & Health
Research Center, PO Box 10787-00100, Nairobi, Kenya.
(4)Department of Medical Sciences and Public health, University of Cagliari, Via 
Università 40, Cagliari, Sardegna, Italy.
(5)School of Community Health and Midwifery, University of Central Lancashire,
Fylde Rd, Preston PR1 2HE, UK.
(6)Center of Salutogenesis, University West, 461 86 Trollhättan, Sweden.
(7)Center for Health Promotion Research, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, NO-7491 Trondheim, Norway.
(8)Health Promotion, Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen, Vej 6 2820 Gentofte,
Denmark.
(9)Faculty of Nursing, University of Girona, 17004 Girona, Spain.
(10)Peres Academic Center, Israel Martin Springer Center of Conflict Studies,
Ben-Gurion University, PO Box 653 Beer-Sheva, Israel.
(11)Department of Health Promotion and Development, University of Bergen,
Christiesgt. 13, 5020 Bergen, Norway.
(12)School of Health and Life Sciences, Glasgow Caledonian University, Glasgow G4
0BA, UK.
(13)Institute of Sociology, University of Vienna, A-1090 Wien, Rooseveltplatz 2, 
Vienna, Austria.
(14)Institute of Sociology, University of Education Freiburg, Kunzenweg 21, 79117
Freiburg, Germany.
(15)Alice Lee Center for Nursing Studies, Yong Lo Lin School of Medicine, 10
Medical Drive, Singapore 117597.
(16)Department of Social Sciences, Health and Society, Wageningen University,
Droevendaalsesteeg 4, 6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(17)Faculty of Health and Social Sciences, Department of Health, Social and
Welfare Studies, University College of Southeast Norway, PO Box 235 3603
Kongsberg, Vestfold, Norway.

Aaron Antonovsky advanced the concept of salutogenesis almost four decades ago
(Antonovsky, Health, Stress and Coping. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA, 1979;
Unravelling the Mystery of Health. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA, 1987).
Salutogenesis posits that life experiences shape the sense of coherence (SOC)
that helps to mobilize resources to cope with stressors and manage tension
successfully (determining one's movement on the health Ease/Dis-ease continuum). 
Antonovsky considered the three-dimensional SOC (i.e. comprehensibility,
manageability, meaningfulness) as the key answer to his question about the origin
of health. The field of health promotion has adopted the concept of salutogenesis
as reflected in the international Handbook of Salutogenesis (Mittelmark et al.,
The Handbook of Salutogenesis. Springer, New York, 2016). However, health
promotion mostly builds on the more vague, general salutogenic orientation that
implies the need to foster resources and capacities to promote health and
wellbeing. To strengthen the knowledge base of salutogenesis, the Global Working 
Group on Salutogenesis (GWG-Sal) of the International Union of Health Promotion
and Education produced the Handbook of Salutogenesis. During the creation of the 
handbook and the regular meetings of the GWG-Sal, the working group identified
four key conceptual issues to be advanced: (i) the overall salutogenic model of
health; (ii) the SOC concept; (iii) the design of salutogenic interventions and
change processes in complex systems; (iv) the application of salutogenesis beyond
health sector. For each of these areas, we first highlight Antonovsky's original 
contribution and then present suggestions for future development. These ideas
will help guide GWG-Sal's work to strengthen salutogenesis as a theory base for
health promotion.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/daz057 
PMID: 31219568  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Health Psychol Open. 2019 Jun 12;6(1):2055102919854977. doi:
10.1177/2055102919854977. eCollection 2019 Jan-Jun.

How to promote fruits, vegetables, and berries intake among patients with type 2 
diabetes in primary care? A self-determination theory perspective.

Koponen AM(1)(2), Simonsen N(1)(2), Suominen S(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Folkhälsan Research Center, Finland.
(2)University of Helsinki, Finland.
(3)University of Skövde, Sweden.
(4)University of Turku, Finland.

The results of this study showed the importance of autonomous motivation for
healthy eating. Autonomous motivation and female gender were the determinants
most strongly associated with fruits, vegetables, and berries intake among
patients with type 2 diabetes. Other determinants of fruits, vegetables, and
berries intake were high education, high social support, high age, and a strong
sense of coherence. Autonomous motivation and self-care competence mediated the
effect of perceived autonomy support from a physician on fruits, vegetables, and 
berries intake. Thus, physicians can promote patients' fruits, vegetables, and
berries intake by supporting their autonomous motivation and self-care
competence. The results are in line with self-determination theory.

DOI: 10.1177/2055102919854977 
PMCID: PMC6563407
PMID: 31218074 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.


93. Sante Publique. 2019 May 13;S1(HS):219-240. doi: 10.3917/spub.190.0219.

[What is the scientific evidence with regard to the effects of forests, trees on 
human health and well-being?]

[Article in French]

Nilsson K, Bentsen P, Grahn P, Mygind L.

In today's modern society, lifestyle-related diseases play an increasingly
important role as the cause of bad health. Staying in and access to environments 
that contain natural elements such as forests, parks and gardens has been
featured because of its potential to stimulating people's health and well-being. 
An independent research area has developed, which addresses issues that try to
explain and document the health effects of access to and activities in nature. To
bring together European researchers working with different aspects of the
relation between nature and health, COST Action E39 "Forests, Trees, and Human
Health and Wellbeing" was established in 2004 and terminated in November 2009.
The main results of COST E39 was presented in the book "Forests, Trees and Human 
Health" published in 2011. This article focuses on three central research
questions regarding the relationship between nature and health: (1) Nature's
restorative and salutogenic effects on human beings, (2) Health effects of
outdoor physical activities, and (3) Therapeutic interventions such as therapy
gardens and forest bathing. Based on a systematic review of research carried out 
in the aftermath of the COST Action the following conclusions are made: (1) There
is a remarkable amount of research publications showing a statistical correlation
between access to nature and green areas and human physical activity and health. 
However, there are few studies that really prove a causal relationship, i.e. that
access to green areas leads to increased physical activity and better health. (2)
The existing research on outdoor activities in natural environments describes a
number of positive associations and effects on health, and the evidence for some 
of these are convincing, albeit there must be reservations for the immediate
applicability of the conclusions. (3) A lot of studies also show that
nature-based therapeutic interventions work and provide clear positive effects,
but there is serious criticism about the quality of the studies. Finally, the
authors suggest more emphasis on research regarding the economic benefits of
nature's health effects, more research on the effects of nature-based therapeutic
interventions, and of broadening the theoretical basis. Furthermore, we foresee a
better integration with health policies and practical implementation within urban
planning and forest management.

DOI: 10.3917/spub.190.0219 
PMID: 31210482  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Relig Health. 2019 Oct;58(5):1886-1907. doi: 10.1007/s10943-019-00860-4.

The Relationship of Forgiveness and Values with Meaning in Life of Polish
Students.

Głaz S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jesuit University Ignatianum in Krakowie, ul. Kopernika 26, 31-501, Kraków,
Poland. zjglaz@cyf-kr.edu.pl.

The purpose of this article was to show the relationship of terminal values and
forgiveness with meaning in life in Polish students who consider themselves
faithful and practicing. The study involved youth studying at the Jesuit
University Ignatianum in Krakow. It was carried out among 368 students. The age
of the participants ranged between 19 and 23. Three tools were applied: Rokeach
Value Survey, Forgiveness Scale by Toussaint, and the Purpose in Life Test of
Crumbaugh and Maholick. The analysis of the results obtained proves that terminal
values and forgiveness have a statistically significant relationship with meaning
in the life of the studying youth.

DOI: 10.1007/s10943-019-00860-4 
PMCID: PMC6759669
PMID: 31209683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Qual Life Res. 2019 Nov;28(11):2889-2899. doi: 10.1007/s11136-019-02231-8. Epub
2019 Jun 18.

Self-management and health related quality of life in persons with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Bringsvor HB(1)(2), Langeland E(3), Oftedal BF(4), Skaug K(5), Assmus J(6),
Bentsen SB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research and Innovation, Helse Fonna HF, Postboks 2170, 5504,
Haugesund, Norway. heidi.breistrand.bringsvor@helse-fonna.no.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Stavanger, Stavanger, Norway.
heidi.breistrand.bringsvor@helse-fonna.no.
(3)Department of Health and Caring Sciences, Western Norway University of Applied
Sciences, Bergen, Norway.
(4)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Stavanger, Stavanger, Norway.
(5)Department of Research and Innovation, Helse Fonna HF, Postboks 2170, 5504,
Haugesund, Norway.
(6)Center for Clinical Research, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

PURPOSE: Although it is well-known that persons with COPD experience lower health
related quality of life (HRQoL), little is known about the importance of
self-management related domains on HRQoL in persons with COPD. Therefore, the
purpose of this study is to examine associations between self-management related 
domains and HRQoL, adjusting for sociodemographic and clinical characteristics,
self-efficacy, and sense of coherence.
METHODS: Cross-sectional data of 225 persons with COPD, recruited from a hospital
register, were analyzed. Self-management related domains were measured using the 
Health education impact questionnaire (heiQ) and HRQoL was measured using the St.
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ). Multiple linear regression analysis
was used.
RESULTS: The final models showed significant associations between the
self-management domains constructive attitudes and approaches and emotional
distress and HRQoL. Dyspnea, number of comorbidities, self-efficacy, and the
various self-management related domains explained 51.3 to 55.1% of the variance
in HRQoL.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that addressing self-management related
domains, in addition to self-efficacy, dyspnea, and comorbidities, may be of
importance for enhancement of HRQoL in persons with COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s11136-019-02231-8 
PMID: 31209647  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Eye (Lond). 2019 Nov;33(11):1768-1775. doi: 10.1038/s41433-019-0490-3. Epub 2019 
Jun 17.

Morphologic and functional outcomes of different optical coherence tomography
patterns of myopic foveoschisis after vitrectomy and inner limiting membrane
peeling.

Sborgia G(1), Boscia F(2), Niro A(3), Giancipoli E(2), D'Amico Ricci G(2),
Sborgia A(1)(4), Sborgia L(1), Recchimurzo N(1), Romano MR(5), Addabbo G(4),
Alessio G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Science, Neuroscience and Sense Organs, Eye Clinic,
University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
(2)Department of Surgical, Microsurgical and Medical Sciences, Eye Clinic,
University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy.
(3)Eye Clinic, Hospital "S. G. MOSCATI", ASL TA, Taranto, Italy.
alfynir@gmail.com.
(4)Eye Clinic, Hospital "S. G. MOSCATI", ASL TA, Taranto, Italy.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele, Milan,
Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the morphologic and functional outcomes of different
optical coherence tomography (OCT) patterns of myopic foveoschisis after
vitrectomy with Inner Limiting Membrane (ILM) peeling.
METHODS: In this prospective non-randomised study, 62 consecutive eyes with
Myopic Foveoschisis were categorised into three groups according to OCT pattern: 
retinoschisis type (Rt) Group (23/62), foveal detachment type (FDt) Group (20/62)
and macular hole type (MHt) Group (19/62). All patients underwent 25-Gauge
vitrectomy and ILM peeling. Air or gas tamponade was used. All patients were
observed at month 1, 2, 4 and 6 after surgery.
MAIN OUTCOMES MEASURES: surgical success as resolution of myopic foveoschisis,
central retinal thickness (CRT), IS/OS junction recovery and best-corrected
visual acuity (BCVA) measurement. Any complication was reported.
RESULTS: In all eyes OCT showed a resolution of the retinoschisis, foveal
detachment and macular hole pattern, respectively. CRT significantly decreased in
all Groups (p < .001), mainly in MHt. IS/OS junction recovery was mainly observed
in MHt. BCVA significantly increased in all Groups (p < .01). A functional gain
≥2 Snellen lines occurred in 70, 85 and 68% in the Rt, FDt and MHt Group,
respectively. Final BCVA was correlated with preoperative BCVA (R 0.74,
p < 0.0001), postoperative CRT (R -0.49, p < 0.0001), and the recovery of IS/OS
junction at 6 months (R 0.76, p < 0.0001). Few postoperative complications
occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: Vitrectomy with ILM peeling results in favourable anatomic and
functional outcomes for different patterns of myopic foveoschisis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41433-019-0490-3 
PMCID: PMC7002739
PMID: 31209260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Gac Sanit. 2019 Nov - Dec;33(6):599. doi: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2019.04.002. Epub 2019
Jun 14.

[Two easy ways to interpret the famous factor loads].

[Article in Spanish]

Ventura-León J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Privada del Norte, Lima, Perú. Electronic address:
jose.ventura@upn.pe.

Comment on
    Gac Sanit. 2019 Jul - Aug;33(4):310-316.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2019.04.002 
PMID: 31208859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Gerontol Geriatr Med. 2019 May 10;5:2333721419846576. doi:
10.1177/2333721419846576. eCollection 2019 Jan-Dec.

Depressive Disorders and Religious Engagement in Very Old People.

Strinnholm S(1), Gustafson Y(1), Niklasson J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Umeå University, Sweden.

Objective: To examine associations between religious engagement and depressive
disorders in very old people. Method: This cross-sectional study uses data from
the Umeå 85+/Gerontological Regional Database (GERDA) study. Every other
85-year-old, every 90-year-old, and everyone more than 95 years from eight
municipalities in northern Sweden and Finland were invited: 1,014 persons
accepted participation. Data were gathered using questionnaires and assessment
scales during structured home visits. Results: The prevalence of depressive
disorders was 35.8%. In a logistic regression model, several factors were
adjusted for, such as demographic variables including social factors, diseases,
and cognitive and physical functional level. A high level of self-reported
religious engagement was independently associated with not having depressive
disorders (odds ratio [OR] = 0.58, confidence interval [CI] = [0.38, 0.89]).
After stratifying by gender, religious engagement was only significant for women 
(OR = 0.49, CI = [0.29, 0.82]). Discussion: There is an association between a
high level of religious engagement and being free from diagnosis of depressive
disorders among very old women.

DOI: 10.1177/2333721419846576 
PMCID: PMC6540474
PMID: 31192277 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The authors
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.


99. Patient Prefer Adherence. 2019 May 17;13:819-828. doi: 10.2147/PPA.S174922.
eCollection 2019.

A theory-driven qualitative study exploring issues relating to adherence to
topical glaucoma medications.

McDonald S(1), Ferguson E(1), Hagger MS(2), Foss AJE(3), King AJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK,
stephanie.mcdonald@nottingham.ac.uk.
(2)School of Psychology, Curtin University, Perth, WA, Australia.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Nottingham University Hospital, Nottingham, UK.

Purpose: Investigating patients' perceptions of their illness can provide
important insights into the experience and management of the illness and
associated treatment, and enhance understanding of variations in adherence to
prescribed medication. The Common-Sense Model of Self-Regulation (CSM) provides a
theoretical framework for the study of illness cognitions, health behavior, and
adherence to health recommendations. The aim of this study was to use the CSM to 
investigate the experience of glaucoma and its treatment from the patients'
perspective, and to apply these insights to classify and clarify issues related
to nonadherence with treatment.
Patients and methods: A qualitative investigation using semi-structured
interviews took place in two outpatient glaucoma clinics. Thirty-three patients
with primary open-angle glaucoma using hypotensive eye drops participated in the 
study. Deductive content analysis was used to analyze the interview data.
Results: Issues relating to nonadherence with hypotensive eye drops and patients'
experience with their glaucoma and treatment were identified. Treatment schedule 
and patient factors were classified as common barriers to adherence. Further
themes include experienced symptoms of glaucoma, illness coherence, and the
emotional and practical consequences of the illness.
Conclusion: Findings provide important insights into the emotional and practical 
outcomes of glaucoma for patients, perceived symptoms of the illness, and
insights into patient memory and cognition. These findings provide supporting
evidence for the importance of conducting theoretically driven qualitative
investigations of patients' experience with glaucoma and their treatment, and
provide suggestions on key issues that need to be addressed in future
multidimensional interventions aimed at improving adherence and patient quality
of life.

DOI: 10.2147/PPA.S174922 
PMCID: PMC6526939
PMID: 31190763 

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of
interest in this work.


100. J Transcult Nurs. 2020 Mar;31(2):153-161. doi: 10.1177/1043659619854509. Epub
2019 Jun 11.

Self-Perceived Health Status and Sense of Coherence in Children With Type 1
Diabetes in the West Bank, Palestine.

Elissa K(1)(2), Bratt EL(1)(3), Axelsson ÅB(1)(4), Khatib S(2), Sparud-Lundin
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Al-Quds University, Abu-Deis, Jerusalem, Palestine.
(3)Queen Silvia Children's Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Introduction: Self-perceived health status and sense of coherence (SOC) are
essential constructs for capturing health outcomes in children with type 1
diabetes (T1D). This study measured self-perceived health status and SOC in
children with T1D and compared them with a healthy reference group in West Bank, 
Palestine. Methodology: One hundred children with T1D aged 8 to 18 years and 300 
healthy children completed PedsQL 4.0 Generic Core Scales and SOC-13 in a
cross-sectional descriptive study. Results: All children reported acceptable
self-perceived health status and low degree of SOC. In the diabetes group, high
degree of SOC was associated with better self-perceived health status and more
optimal metabolic control. Males in the diabetes group reported higher
self-perceived health status than females. Discussion: The unstable political
situation in Palestine may threaten SOC in children in general. Health
professionals can monitor self-perceived health status and SOC to evaluate
interventions aiming to improve glycemic control.

DOI: 10.1177/1043659619854509 
PMID: 31184279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Arch Public Health. 2019 Jun 7;77:26. doi: 10.1186/s13690-019-0354-0. eCollection
2019.

The experience of motivation and adherence to group-based exercise of Norwegians 
aged 80 and more: a qualitative study.

Stødle IV(1), Debesay J(1), Pajalic Z(1), Lid IM(2), Bergland A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oslo Metropolitan University, Faculty of Health Sciences, Pilestredet, PO Box 
4, St. Olavs plass, 0130 Oslo, Norway.
(2)2VID Specialized University, Faculty of Health Studies, PO Box 184, Vinderen, 
0319 Oslo, Norway.

Background: Physical activity is crucial for public health; worldwide, across all
age groups, exercise has been recognised as a factor that leads to improved
health. However, many people do not engage in regular physical activity and hence
miss the opportunity to achieve these significant physical and mental health
benefits. With the benefits of exercise in mind, the aim of the present study is 
to describe the experiences of older people's motivation for participating in and
adhering to a group-based exercise intervention in a local community setting.
Methods: A qualitative design was used in which semistructured interviews of
three men and four women of an advanced age (81-92) were conducted; the
participants described their experiences with their participation in and
adherence to a long-term group exercise intervention programme in a community
setting. Data were analysed using systematic text condensation and discussed in
light of the salutogenetic theory.
Results: Four main themes emerged from the data collection: (1) Experience of
health challenges: A meaningful starting point; (2) Adherence motivated by
increased life-manageability; (3) Comprehensibility through skilled instruction
and (4) Social and professional support enhancing motivation. The participants;
who had experienced negative changes to their health and function, as well as to 
their life situation, chose to sign up for the exercise groups and continued to
participate throughout the entire intervention. Attending group exercise sessions
meant positive changes to physical, mental and social functions enhancing the
participants' motivation to sustain their attendance and leading to positive
behavioural changes that were important to their everyday lives.
Conclusion: Essential factors for these participants' decision to sign up for the
exercise groups were the following: having important life areas connected to
physical activity in their history and having belief in exercise as an effective 
way to restore function and coping; as well as having current experience of
health challenges. Adherence to the group exercise was associated with better
coping and the ability to fulfil roles and keep up with important life areas.
Support from family, friends and professionals also contributed, both to the
process of signing up, and adhering to this long-term intervention. The
professionals' skills and the way the instructor tailored group instruction were 
emphasized as very important to the participants' adherence. Understanding of
motivational factors for participation in and adherence to, exercise programmes
is of great importance to older people, health professionals and society.

DOI: 10.1186/s13690-019-0354-0 
PMCID: PMC6555722
PMID: 31183078 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no potential competing interest to disclose.


102. Indian J Dent Res. 2019 Mar-Apr;30(2):207-212. doi: 10.4103/ijdr.IJDR_381_17.

Orofacial conditions and their relation to the sense of coherence among
participants afflicted with leprosy in West Bengal State: A cross-sectional
study.

Mishra P(1), Fareed N(1), Jagan P(2).

Author information: 
(1)KVG Dental College and Hospital, Sullia, Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of Public Health Dentistry, Sri Ramakrishna Dental College and
Hospital, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India.

Introduction: About 4 million people are disabled by leprosy. Eighty-six percent 
of leprosy patients reside in Southeast Asia and Brazil. India accounts for up to
70% of total cases. In India, it is highest in West Bengal, Maharashtra, Uttar
Pradesh, and Bihar.
Objective: The objective of the study is to assess the quality of life in terms
of sense of coherence (SOC) among patients afflicted with leprosy in the state of
West Bengal (located in eastern India on the Bay of Bengal).
Methodology: A cross-sectional descriptive epidemiological study was conducted
among estimated sample size of 350 participants who were afflicted with leprosy
drawn from across the state of West Bengal, India. Data were collected on a
specially designed pro forma.
Results: Most of the participants afflicted with leprosy were in the age group of
40-77 years, and there was predominance of males, with most of them belonging to 
the upper-lower socioeconomic class. On evaluating the incidence of extraoral
lesions through ranking, facial nodules and facial spots were highest 182 (52%), 
while among intraoral lesions such as melanin pigmentation 176 (50%) and
inflammatory papillary hyperplasia 150 (42.8%), was seen in greater fraction. The
results of bivariate analysis between SOC and variables under investigation show 
that majority of the cases, i.e., 258 (47.14%) revealed the SOC interpretation as
"poor." Statistical analysis showed significant difference in relation to age (P 
≤ 0001) and socioeconomic status (P = 0.053) of participants.
Conclusions: We conclude that 52% of the population were having facial nodules
and facial spots and 50.2% of the population had intraoral manifestation such as 
melanin pigmentation. Analysis of SOC revealed that majority of the cases were
interpreted as "poor."

DOI: 10.4103/ijdr.IJDR_381_17 
PMID: 31169151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None


103. Eur J Psychotraumatol. 2019 May 20;10(1):1606628. doi:
10.1080/20008198.2019.1606628. eCollection 2019.

Higher sense of coherence is associated with better mental and physical health in
emergency medical services: results from investigations on the revised sense of
coherence scale (SOC-R) in rescue workers.

Behnke A(1), Conrad D(1)(2), Kolassa IT(1), Rojas R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical & Biological Psychology, Institute of Psychology and Education, Ulm
University, Ulm, Germany.
(2)Clinical Psychology and Neuropsychology, Department of Psychology, University 
of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.
(3)Universitary Psychotherapeutic Outpatient Clinic, Institute of Psychology and 
Education, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany.

As rescue workers are regularly confronted with potentially traumatising on-duty 
events, they have an increased risk to develop trauma-related mental and physical
health impairments, including post-traumatic, depressive, and somatic symptoms.
For this high-risk group, it could be of particular importance to experience
their occupational burden as manageable, meaningful, and coherent. This mindset -
called sense of coherence - may be a potential resilience factor against the
development of mental and physical health problems. In a cross-sectional cohort
of 102 rescue workers (Mdn(QD)age = 26.0 (8.5), age range: 18-61), including 36
women, we investigated whether higher values on the Revised Sense of Coherence
Scale (SOC-R) predicted lower post-traumatic, depressive, and somatic symptoms.
In addition, we evaluated the factor structure of the SOC-R using confirmatory
factor analyses. Linear regressions indicated that higher SOC-R, but particularly
manageability scores were associated with less post-traumatic (β = -.31, p =
.009), depressive (β = -.44, p < .001), and somatic symptoms (β = -.36, p =
.002). Furthermore, we found that all symptom scores significantly increased with
occupational and private-life trauma exposure. The SOC-R's factor structure was
replicated, comprising the three subscales manageability, reflection, and
balance. However, the SOC-R's convergent factor validity was rather low in the
present sample. Taken together, a high sense of coherence, and in particular a
high manageability conviction, was observed as resilience factors for high-risk
groups that are frequently exposed to potentially traumatic events. Future
studies might investigate whether strengthening the sense of coherence could be
one building block in an effective prevention program for maintaining long-term
health in risk groups.

Publisher: Debido a que los trabajadores de rescate se enfrentan regularmente con
eventos laborales potencialmente traumatizantes, presentan un mayor riesgo de
desarrollar trastornos mentales y físicos relacionados con el trauma, incluyendo 
síntomas postraumáticos, depresivos y somáticos. Para este grupo de alto riesgo
sería importante el experimentar su trabajo como manejable, significativo y
coherente. Esta perspectiva —llamada sentido de coherencia— podría ser un factor 
potencial de resiliencia en contra del desarrollo de problemas mentales y
físicos. En una cohorte transversal con 102 trabajadores de rescate (Mdn(QD)edad 
= 26.0 (8.5), rango de edad: 18-61), de los cuáles 36 eran mujeres, investigamos 
si los valores más altos en la Escala del Sentido de Coherencia Revisada (SOC-R) 
predijeron menos síntomas postraumáticos, depresivos y somáticos. Además,
evaluamos la estructura factorial del SOC-R mediante análisis factoriales
confirmatorios. Las regresiones lineales indicaron que las puntuaciones más altas
del SOC-R, pero particularmente la capacidad de menejabilidad, se asociaron con
menos síntomas postraumáticos (β = −.31, p = .009), depresivos (β = −.44, p
<.001) y somáticos (β = −.36, p = .002). Además, encontramos que a mayor la
exposición con traumas laborales y privados los puntajes de estos síntomas
aumentaron significativamente. La estructura factorial del SOC-R se replicó con
sus tres subescalas manejabilidad, reflexión y equilibrio. Sin embargo, la
validez del factor convergente del SOC-R era menor en la presente muestra. En
general, se observó que un alto sentido de coherencia y, en particular una alta
manejabilidad, funcionan como factores de resiliencia en grupos de alto riesgo
que con frecuencia están expuestos a eventos potencialmente traumáticos. Estudios
futuros deberían investigar si el fortalecimiento del sentido de coherencia
podría ser un componente básico en un programa de prevención eficaz para mantener
la salud a largo plazo en grupos de riesgo.Publisher:
由于救援人员经常面临可能造成创伤的职业事件，他们发生创伤相关的精神和身体健康损害的风险增加，包括创伤后应激、抑郁和躯体症状。对于这个高风险群体而言，将其职业负担看
作为可管理，有意义且一致可能尤为重要。这种被称为心理一致感的心理状态可能是一种潜在的抵御心理和身体健康问题发展的韧性因素。在102名救援人员（Mdn(QD)
年龄=
26.0（8.5），年龄范围：18-61）的横断面队列研究中，包括36名女性。我们考察了修订心理一致感量表（SOC-R）的更高分数是否预测较低的创伤后应激、抑郁和
躯体症状。此外，我们使用验证性因子分析评估了SOC-R的因子结构。 线性回归分析表明，较高的SOC-R分数，尤其是可控性得分与较少的创伤后应激（β= −.31，p
= .009），抑郁（β= −.44，p <.001）和躯体症状（β = −.36，p =
.002）相关。进一步的，我们发现随着职业和个人生活创伤暴露，所有症状评分都显著增加。
SOC-R的因子结构得到重复，包括三个分量表：可管理性，反思和平衡。不过，在本样本中SOC-R的聚合效度相当低。总的来说，高度心理一致性，尤其是高的可控信念，被视
为经常暴露于潜在创伤事件的高风险群体的韧性因素。未来的研究可能会调查加强心理一致感是否可以成为有效维持风险群体长期健康的预防计划的一个组成部分。.
DOI: 10.1080/20008198.2019.1606628 
PMCID: PMC6534248
PMID: 31164965 


104. Int J Behav Med. 2019 Oct;26(5):531-541. doi: 10.1007/s12529-019-09793-4.

Illness Cognitions Among Adolescents and Young Adults Who Have a Parent with
Cancer: a Qualitative Exploration Using the Common-Sense Model of Self-regulation
as a Framework.

Fletcher C(1), Wilson C(2)(3)(4), Flight I(2), Gunn K(2)(5), Patterson P(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Flinders Centre for Innovation in Cancer, College of Medicine and Public
Health, Flinders University, Sturt Road, Bedford Park, SA, 5042, Australia.
chloe.fletcher@flinders.edu.au.
(2)Flinders Centre for Innovation in Cancer, College of Medicine and Public
Health, Flinders University, Sturt Road, Bedford Park, SA, 5042, Australia.
(3)Olivia Newton-John Cancer Wellness and Research Centre, 145 Studley Road,
Heidelberg, VIC, 3084, Australia.
(4)School of Psychology and Public Health, La Trobe University, Bundoora, VIC,
3086, Australia.
(5)University of South Australia Cancer Research Institute, University of South
Australia, North Terrace, Adelaide, SA, 5000, Australia.
(6)CanTeen Australia, 75 King Street, Newtown, NSW, 2042, Australia.
(7)Cancer Nursing Research Unit, University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, 2006,
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Individuals construct beliefs about an illness based on their own
perceptions, interpretation, and understanding of the illness and its treatment. 
These beliefs (collectively referred to as "illness cognitions" or
"representations") can have implications for psychological outcomes in family
members and carers of an individual with an illness. The aim of this study was to
explore young people's perceptions of their parent's cancer using the
Common-Sense Model of Self-Regulation as a theoretical framework.
METHODS: Semi-structured, one-on-one interviews were conducted with young people 
who had a parent diagnosed with cancer. Interview transcripts were analysed using
deductive thematic analysis techniques.
RESULTS: Eleven young people aged 15-24 years participated in the study. Major
themes aligned with the dimensions of the Common-Sense Model of Self-Regulation. 
Young people described their experiences with parental cancer with reference to
cognitive representations (beliefs about the illness identity, their
understanding or coherence of the illness, and consequences, curability or
controllability, timeline, and cause of the illness) and emotional
representations (emotional beliefs and subjective feelings about the illness).
CONCLUSIONS: Findings indicate that young people's perceptions of their parent's 
cancer can be usefully described within the framework of the Common-Sense Model
of Self-Regulation. Future research should investigate the relationships between 
young people's illness cognitions, coping strategies, and psychological
adjustment following their parent's cancer diagnosis. This will provide valuable 
insights for the development of interventions that target specific types of
illness cognitions associated with maladaptive coping strategies and poor
adjustment.

DOI: 10.1007/s12529-019-09793-4 
PMID: 31161590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Asthma. 2020 Jul;57(7):769-777. doi: 10.1080/02770903.2019.1609983. Epub 2019
Jun 3.

Acceptability of a theory-based adherence intervention for adults with asthma - a
person-based approach.

Katzer CB(1), Mes MA(1), Chan AHY(1), Wileman V(1), Taylor SJC(2), Horne R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Practice and Policy, Centre for Behavioural Medicine, School of 
Pharmacy, University College London, London, UK.
(2)Centre for Primary Care and Public Health, Blizard Institute, Barts and The
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK.

Objective: Nonadherence to inhaled corticosteroids contributes to poor asthma
control. This study evaluated two different theory-based intervention approaches 
to address nonadherence in adults with asthma using a person-based, qualitative
approach to investigate comprehensibility, coherence and acceptability.Methods:
The two intervention approaches addressed treatment beliefs and misconceptions in
asthma, aiming to provide a common-sense rationale for medication adherence.
Approach one reframed asthma using a concept of balance, the second approach was 
more traditional presenting medical consequences of nonadherence. We ran three
focus group interviews involving 19 adults with asthma to investigate patient
acceptability of the intervention approaches and their influence on perceptions
of asthma and medication.Results: Approach one was perceived as novel compared to
current practice, logical and easily understandable. Its use of non-medical
jargon was perceived as representing information more positively, moving away
from stigmatizing people with asthma. Approach two was perceived as not
sufficiently novel, not applicable to everyone's illness experience and
triggering fear.Conclusions: Patient feedback allowed us to refine our
intervention strategy prior to running costly feasibility trials. Patient-based
approaches for intervention planning may facilitate implementation and
acceptability of interventions in practice.

DOI: 10.1080/02770903.2019.1609983 
PMID: 31155979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Med Anthropol Q. 2019 Sep;33(3):439-458. doi: 10.1111/maq.12527. Epub 2019 Jun
20.

"Find that Balance:" The Impact of Cultural Consonance and Dissonance on Mental
Health among Utah and Mormon Women.

Dengah HJF 2nd(1), Bingham Thomas E(2), Hawvermale E(3), Temple E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sociology, Social Work, and Anthropology, Utah State University.
(2)Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University.
(3)Department of Anthropology, University of North Texas.
(4)Department of Anthropology, Western Washington University.

Cultural consonance and religious participation are both associated with
salutogenic mental health outcomes. Yet studies of religious and other cultural
models must take into account multiple and conflicting cultural norms. In this
article, we explore the consequences of trying to adhere to the oppositional
cultural models of religious (Latter-day Saint or Mormon) and secular American
gender roles as perceived by college-aged women at a Utah university. Using
cultural consensus and cultural consonance analysis, we demonstrate that while
conforming with one model may provide social and mental health benefits, striving
for consonance with both results in increased perceived stress levels for
Latter-day Saints and nonmembers alike. Such cultural dissonance may be a
contributing factor to the current mental health crisis among Utah youth. This
work expands the theory of cultural consonance by examining it in the context of 
two incongruent lifestyles.

© 2019 by the American Anthropological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/maq.12527 
PMID: 31134662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Int J Qual Stud Health Well-being. 2019 Dec;14(1):1622354. doi:
10.1080/17482631.2019.1622354.

Cancer, a relational disease exploring the needs of relatives to cancer patients.

Sandén U(1), Nilsson F(1), Thulesius H(2), Hägglund M(3), Harrysson L(4).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Design sciences , Lund University , Lund , Sweden.
(2)b Research and Development Kronoberg and Linnaeus University , Växjö , Sweden.
(3)c Department of Women's and Children's Health , Uppsala University and Uppsala
University Hospital , Uppsala , Sweden.
(4)d School of Social Work , Lund University , Helsingborg , Sweden.

Purpose: In this qualitative interview study we investigated the experiences of
family members to cancer patients. Our objective was to explore and to
differentiate their needs from the needs of cancer patients. Methods: Five focus 
groups and six individual narrative interviews with 17 family members to cancer
patients in Sweden were conducted and compared with 19 cancer patient interviews.
Our analysis was inspired by classic grounded theory. Results: Family members to 
cancer patients expressed own morbidity connected to high stress levels and
difficulties in recognizing own stress due to ongoing comparisons with the cancer
patient. Family members were trapped in a momentary terror-like situation where
they became their sick relative's safety net. A percieved inability to improve
their loved one's well being contributed to a feeling of guilt. The longing for
it all to end was encumbered with shame since the end included possible death.
Conclusions: By recognizing cancer as a disease striking both body and
relationships, family members are given precedence over their own struggles,
differentiated from the patient's experiences. We define differences in needs
between cancer patients and family members. Family members to cancer patients may
be supported in developing balancing strategies towards less stress, increased
safety and moments of contentment.

DOI: 10.1080/17482631.2019.1622354 
PMCID: PMC6534208
PMID: 31122166  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. PLoS One. 2019 May 23;14(5):e0217106. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0217106.
eCollection 2019.

Cultural adaptation and psychometric validation of the Caring Efficacy scale in a
sample of Italian nurses.

Aviles Gonzalez CI(1), Galletta M(2), Melis P(3), Contu P(2), Watson J(4), Finco 
G(1), Jimenez Herrera MF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Anesthesia and Intensive Care Department, University of Cagliari, Monserrato, 
CA, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health, University of Cagliari,
Monserrato, CA, Italy.
(3)Pain Therapy Service, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(4)Watson Caring Science Institute, Boulder, CO, United States of America.
(5)Departament d'Infermeria, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona, Spain.

Caring is the essence of nursing practice. Caring Efficacy scale was developed
with the purpose of measuring nurses' perceived self-efficacy in orienting and
maintaining caring relationships with patients. Since any instruments measuring
caring self-efficacy have not been developed in Italy, the study aimed at
culturally adapting and validating Caring Efficacy scale in a sample of Italian
nurses. A total of 300 registered nurses were asked to fill a self-reported
questionnaire; translation-back-translation procedure was carried out to maintain
semantic, idiomatic and conceptual equivalence of the original scale. Then,
factor analysis was performed in order to test appropriateness of the factor
structure. Convergent and discriminant validity was also tested. A two-factor
structure with 17 items was found. Results show that Cronbach's Alpha value was
0.84 for Confidence to Care, and 0.75 for Doubts and Concerns. Correlation
analysis for convergent and discriminant validity showed that Confidence to Care 
was positively correlated with sense of coherence and no significant correlation 
with Doubts and Concerns was found. Caring efficacy scale can be used by nurse
managers as a way of assessing nurses' self-efficacy and their caring
orientation, thus improving quality of patient care.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0217106 
PMCID: PMC6532878
PMID: 31120938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


109. BMC Psychol. 2019 May 22;7(1):30. doi: 10.1186/s40359-019-0301-4.

Reliability and validity of the Japanese version of the Mental Health
Self-management Questionnaire among people with mental illness living in the
community.

Morita Y(1), Miyamoto Y(2), Takano A(3), Kawakami N(4), Coulombe S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatric Nursing, Graduate School of Medicine, The University
of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan. y-mrt@umin.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Psychiatric Nursing, Graduate School of Medicine, The University
of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan.
(3)Department of Mental Health and Psychiatric Nursing, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8510, Japan.
(4)Department of Mental Health, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan.
(5)Department of Psychology, Faculty of Science, Wilfrid Laurier University, 75
University Avenue West, Waterloo, Ontario, N2L 3C5, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Self-management is an important factor in maintaining and promoting
mental health and recovery from mental health challenges. Thus, it is important
to assess and support mental health self-management. In this study, we aimed to
develop the Japanese version of the Mental Health Self-management Questionnaire
(MHSQ-J), a scale to assess mental health self-management strategy, and clarify
its psychometric properties among people with mental illness living in Japan.
METHODS: An anonymous self-administered survey including MHSQ-J was conducted for
psychiatric outpatient users (N = 295), and 104 of the participants completed
MHSQ-J again about two weeks later. Internal consistency was assessed with
Cronbach's α, and test-retest reliability was confirmed by the intraclass
correlation coefficient (ICC). Construct validity was assessed based on
structural validity with confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) and exploratory
factor analysis (EFA), and hypotheses testing. The Self-management Skill Scale,
the University of Tokyo Health Sociology version of the Sense of Coherence Scale 
ver1.2, the Japanese version of Self-identified Stage of Recovery Part-B, the
Japanese version of the Flourishing Scale, and the Japanese version of the WHO
Disability Assessment Scale 2.0 were used for hypotheses testing.
RESULTS: Data from 243 respondents were analyzed. The result of CFA, the
goodness-of-fit indices showed marginal fit (AGFI = .830, CFI = .852,
RMSEA = .072). EFA identified three factors (Clinical, Empowerment, and
Vitality), and the results suggested that the factor structure of the Japanese
version of MHSQ was similar to the original 3-factor structure. Significant
correlations were found with the hypotheses testing variables related to
self-management and recovery, especially on the total score, the Empowerment
subscale, and the Vitality subscale. Cronbach's α (Clinical: .65, Empowerment:
.81, Vitality: .75, Total: .83) and ICC (Clinical: .75, 95% confidence interval
(CI) [.62, .84], Empowerment: .81, 95% CI [.70, .88], Vitality: .62, 95% CI [.44,
.75], Total: .84, 95% CI [.75, .90]) indicated good reliability.
CONCLUSION: The results show that MHSQ-J has acceptable reliability and validity 
to measure the use of self-management strategies for mental health among
community living people with mental illness in Japan.

DOI: 10.1186/s40359-019-0301-4 
PMCID: PMC6532246
PMID: 31118086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2019 Jul;158(1):315-322. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2019.01.117. Epub 2019 Feb 11.

Salutogenesis and the art of sustainability: Help from the 3 C's.

Bremner RM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Center for Thoracic Disease and Transplantation,
Norton Thoracic Institute, St Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center, Phoenix,
Ariz. Electronic address: Ross.Bremner@DignityHealth.org.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2019.01.117 
PMID: 31109709  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Int Assoc Provid AIDS Care. 2019 Jan-Dec;18:2325958219845419. doi:
10.1177/2325958219845419.

The Impact of Formal and Informal Institutions on ART Drug Adherence.

Kumsa DM(1), Tucho GT(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Sociology, College of Social Sciences and Humanities, Jimma
University, Jimma, Ethiopia.
(2)2 Department of Environmental Health Sciences and Technology, Faculty of
Public Health, Jimma University, Jimma, Ethiopia.

A successful antiretroviral therapy (ART) drug adherence is achieved when
patients follow their prescribed regimen. This is determined by patient's
motivation that is influenced by resources associated with the patient, society, 
and relevant institutions. The aim of this study is to assess the impact of
formal and informal actors on patients' ART drug adherence. A qualitative study
approach was conducted through face-to-face in-depth interviews of HIV-infected
patients and key informants. The analysis was guided by a salutogenic model
focusing on generalized resistance resources and a sense of coherence. The
finding shows that 76% of the study participants achieved the recommended 95%
adherence level. Several resources attributed to individuals, society, and public
institutions influencing patients' day-to-day life and their drug adherence were 
identified. Patients who are able to use the available resources easily develop
sense of coherence and follow their prescribed drug regimen. Therefore,
encouraging HIV-infected patients through formal and informal actors can enhance 
ART drug adherence.

DOI: 10.1177/2325958219845419 
PMCID: PMC6748520
PMID: 31109220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Pers Assess. 2020 Sep-Oct;102(5):677-688. doi: 10.1080/00223891.2019.1611588.
Epub 2019 May 20.

Development and Validation of a Future Self-Continuity Questionnaire: A
Preliminary Report.

Sokol Y(1)(2)(3)(4), Serper M(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)VISN 2 South Mental Illness Research Education and Clinical Centers,
Washington, DC.
(2)James J. Peters VAMC, New York, NY.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.
(4)Psychology Department, Hofstra University.

Future self-continuity, the sense of persistence of selfhood from the present to 
the future, is a fundamental feature of personal identity. Decreased
self-continuity between the present and future self is associated with
disadvantageous behaviors and increased psychopathology. The primary aim of the
series of studies reported in this article was to develop and assess the
psychometric properties and validity of an instrument designed to measure present
to future self-continuity, the Future Self-Continuity Questionnaire (FSCQ).
Exploratory factor analysis techniques were used to select items for removal and 
inclusion and to develop a potential factor model. Confirmatory factor analysis
techniques were then employed to demonstrate model fit across 4 independent
samples of adults (N = 1,481). Data are also presented demonstrating convergent, 
discriminant, and nomological validity. Findings support the coherence of the
FSCQ, indicating the scale has adequate test-retest reliability, concurrent and
discriminant validity, and an internally consistent replicable factor structure
related to the construct of future self-continuity and relevant indexes including
levels of consideration of future consequences, temporal discounting, depression,
hopelessness, suicidality, anhedonia, and subjective quality of life.

DOI: 10.1080/00223891.2019.1611588 
PMID: 31107602  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging. 2019 Jul;4(7):627-635. doi:
10.1016/j.bpsc.2019.03.007. Epub 2019 Mar 29.

Functional Connectivity Between Extrastriate Body Area and Default Mode Network
Predicts Depersonalization Symptoms in Major Depression: Findings From an A
Priori Specified Multinetwork Comparison.

Paul ER(1), Farmer M(2), Kämpe R(1), Cremers HR(3), Hamilton JP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Social and Affective Neuroscience, Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(2)Department of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Roosevelt University, 
Chicago, Illinois.
(3)Department of Clinical Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(4)Center for Social and Affective Neuroscience, Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden. Electronic
address: paul.hamilton@liu.se.

BACKGROUND: Depersonalization/derealization disorder is a dissociative disorder
characterized by feelings of unreality and detachment from the self and
surroundings. Depersonalization/derealization disorder is classified as a primary
disorder, but depersonalization symptoms are frequently observed in mood and
anxiety disorders. In the context of major depressive disorder (MDD),
depersonalization symptoms are associated with greater depressive severity as
indexed by treatment resistance, inpatient visits, and duration of depressive
episodes. In the current investigation, we tested four network-based,
neural-functional hypotheses of depersonalization in MDD. These hypotheses were
framed in terms of functional relationships between 1) extrastriate body area and
default mode network (DMN); 2) hippocampus and DMN; 3) medial prefrontal cortex
and ventral striatum; and 4) posterior and anterior insular cortex.
METHODS: We conducted functional magnetic resonance imaging during resting state 
on 28 female patients with MDD and 27 control subjects with no history of a
psychiatric disorder. Functional connectivity between seed and target regions as 
specified by our network-level hypotheses was computed and correlated with scores
on the Cambridge Depersonalization Scale. We used a conservative, unbiased
bootstrapping procedure to test the significance of neural-behavioral
correlations observed under each of the four models tested.
RESULTS: Of the four neural-functional models of depersonalization symptoms
tested, only the model proposing that reduced connectivity between the
extrastriate body area and DMN predicts higher levels of depersonalization
symptoms in MDD was confirmed.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that depersonalization/derealization disorder
symptoms in patients with depression are related to reduced functional
connectivity between brain regions that are proposed to support processing of
body-related (extrastriate body area) and autobiographical (DMN) information.

Copyright © 2019 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpsc.2019.03.007 
PMID: 31103548  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. PM R. 2020 Feb;12(2):154-160. doi: 10.1002/pmrj.12190. Epub 2019 Aug 1.

Sense of Coherence and the Association with Sociodemographics and Disability
Related Factors in Persons with Late Effects of Polio.

Nolvi M(1)(2), Brogårdh C(1)(2), Jacobsson L(1)(3), Lexell J(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation Medicine, Skåne University
Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation, Sunderby Hospital, Luleå, Sweden.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation Medicine, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Sense of Coherence (SOC) is important for successful adaptation in
persons with life-long disabilities. A previous study has shown that persons with
Late Effects of Polio (LEoP) have a level of SOC indicating that they generally
have the ability to understand, handle, and have the motivation to deal with
stressful events and problems arising in their lives. However, no study has
explored the associations between SOC, sociodemographics, and disability-related 
factors in persons with LEoP.
OBJECTIVE: To explore the associations between SOC, sociodemographics, and
disability-related factors in persons with LEoP.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional design.
SETTING: University hospital outpatient clinic.
STUDY PARTICIPANTS: Ninety-three persons (mean age 74 years, 52% women) with
LEoP.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS: Swedish versions of the Sense of Coherence scale
(SOC-13), Self-reported Impairments in Persons with Late Effects of Polio (SIPP) 
scale, Reintegration to Normal Living Index (RNL-I) (subscales "Daily
Functioning" and "Perceptions of Self"), and Satisfaction With Life Scale (SWLS).
METHODS: The participants responded to a postal survey with background
information and the four rating scales. To determine factors associated with SOC,
a hierarchical regression analysis was performed with SOC as the dependent
variable.
RESULTS: Higher age, less bothered by symptoms of LEoP, better perceptions of
self, and higher life satisfaction were significantly associated with a greater
SOC score. The final model explained 60% of the variance in the SOC (R2
Adj = 0.60, P < .001).
CONCLUSIONS: The strong association between SOC, higher age, and
disability-related factors is important to consider in the rehabilitation of
persons with LEoP. This knowledge can assist rehabilitation professionals to plan
interventions that enable people with LEoP to develop strategies to better manage
their daily life.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: III.

© 2019 American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation.

DOI: 10.1002/pmrj.12190 
PMID: 31102303 


115. Biomed Res Int. 2019 Apr 9;2019:6821575. doi: 10.1155/2019/6821575. eCollection
2019.

Assessment of Psychosocial Functioning of Mothers of Children with Diabetes
Mellitus Compared to Mothers of Healthy Children.

Makara-Studzińska M(1), Somasundaram S(2), Ashraf GM(3), Gogacz M(4), Madej A(5),
Izydorczyk B(5), Leszek J(6), Lebedeva SA(7), Chubarev VN(7), Tarasov VV(7),
Kirkland E(8), Aliev G(7)(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Health Psychology Unit, Collegium Medicum, Jagiellonian University, Kraków,
Poland.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Salem University, Salem, WV 26426, USA.
(3)King Fahd Medical Research Center, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia.
(4)Department of Applied Psychology, Medical University of Lublin, Poland.
(5)Institute of Applied Psychology, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.
(7)Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University (Sechenov University), 119991, 
Moscow, Russia.
(8)School of Education & Business, Professor and Vice President, Salem
University, WV, 26426, USA.
(9)Institute of Physiologically Active Compounds, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Chernogolovka, 142432, Russia.
(10)GALLY International Biomedical Research Institute, 7733 Louis Pasteur Drive, 
#330, San Antonio, TX, 78229, USA.

Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a chronic disease requiring changes in the behaviour of
the entire family. The responsibility for implementing doctor's recommendations
falls mainly upon the mother. The aim of this study is to assess the psychosocial
functioning of mothers of children with DM compared to mothers of healthy
children. The study involved 120 mothers: 60 with children with DM and 60 with
healthy children. Data were collected using an original social-demographic
questionnaire developed by the authors as well as Antonovsky's Sense of Coherence
Scale (SOC-29), Schwarzer and Schultz's Berlin Social Support Scales (BSSS),
Rosenberg's Self-Esteem Scale (SES), and Zigmond and Snaith's Hospital Anxiety
and Depression Scale (HADS). The assessment scales were standardised and
accredited by the Polish Psychological Association. The results suggest that DM
in children has no effect on the psychosocial functioning of mothers regarding
their self-esteem and sense of coherence. However, mothers of children with DM
are well-prepared for living in a difficult situation. Social support offered to 
mothers of diabetic children helps them to maintain their psychosocial health.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/6821575 
PMCID: PMC6481141
PMID: 31093501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Int J Nurs Pract. 2019 Jun;25(3):e12736. doi: 10.1111/ijn.12736. Epub 2019 May
14.

The mediational effect of coherence on the relationship between mental load and
job burnout among oncology nurses.

Wilczek-Rużyczka E(1), Dębska G(2), Pasek M(2), Zwierzchowska M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Psychology and Humanities, A.F. Modrzewski Krakow University,
Krakow, Poland.
(2)Faculty of Health and Medical Studies, A.F. Modrzewski Krakow University,
Krakow, Poland.
(3)Faculty of Individual Differences and Psychological Diagnosis, SWPS University
of Social Sciences and Humanities, Warszawa, Poland.

AIMS: The purpose of this study was to determine the mediational effect of
coherence on the relationship between mental load and job burnout among oncology 
nurses.
BACKGROUND: Working stress and strain cause high mental load and can lead to job 
burnout among oncology nurses. Sense of coherence protects against the negative
consequences of occupational mental load and may prevent professional burnout.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study was carried out with 165 oncology nurses from
chemotherapy departments. The data were collected from April to September 2013
using the Antonovsky Sense of Coherence Scale, Meister questionnaire, and Maslach
Burnout Inventory.
RESULTS: Manageability mediated the relations between Mental Load and both
Emotional Exhaustion and Depersonalization. Meaningfulness exerted significant
mediational effect on the relationship between Mental Load and Depersonalization.
Manageability and Meaningfulness attenuate the unfavourable effect of Monotony
and Unspecific load on motional Exhaustion and Depersonalization.
CONCLUSIONS: Sense of coherence, especially Manageability and Meaningfulness,
seems to be an important resource for oncology nurses, buffering the negative
impact of mental load on well-being of nurses. Strengthening the sense of
coherence can be helpful in preventing or dealing with professional burnout.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ijn.12736 
PMID: 31087514  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. BMJ Case Rep. 2019 May 10;12(5). pii: e224451. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2018-224451.

Novel non-sense mutation in RP2 (c.843_844insT/p.Arg282fs) is associated with a
severe phenotype of retinitis pigmentosa without evidence of primary retinal
pigment epithelium involvement.

Horner F(1), Wawrzynski J(1), MacLaren RE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology, Department of Clinical Neurosciences,John Radcliffe Hospital,
Oxford, UK.

Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) relates to a heterogeneous group of rod-cone
dystrophies of varying genetic aetiology. There is currently great interest in
gene replacement therapy. Phenotyping is of particular importance because some RP
genes are expressed ubiquitously and it is critically important to understand
which retinal layer is primarily affected. RP2 is increasingly diagnosed in
patients suffering from X-linked RP, which causes outer retinal degeneration. We 
present a case of a previously unreported null mutation in RP2 associated with
severe RP. Loss of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) was noted in the central 
macula but not around the disc or peripherally. There was therefore no evidence
of independent degeneration of the RPE. Hence despite expression in all retinal
cells, RP2 deficiency does not appear to be pathogenic to the RPE. This
observation may be helpful in considering the promoter and route of delivery of
adeno-associated viral gene therapy vectors encoding RP2.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2019. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2018-224451 
PMCID: PMC6536216
PMID: 31079036  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


118. Nurse Educ Today. 2019 Aug;79:8-13. doi: 10.1016/j.nedt.2019.05.004. Epub 2019
May 6.

Sense of coherence, academic performance and professional vocation in Certified
Nursing Assistant students.

Colomer-Pérez N(1), Paredes-Carbonell JJ(2), Sarabia-Cobo C(3), Gea-Caballero
V(4).

Author information: 
(1)Facultat d'Infermeria i Podologia, Universitat de València, València, Spain;
Instituto Universitario de Investigación en Tráfico y Seguridad Vial (INTRAS),
Universitat de València, València, Spain.
(2)Facultat d'Infermeria i Podologia, Universitat de València, València, Spain;
Centre de Salut Pública d'Alzira, Conselleria de Sanitat Universal i Salut
Pública, Alzira, València, Spain; Fundació per al Foment de la Investigació
Sanitària i Biomèdica de la Comunitat Valenciana (FISABIO), València, Spain.
(3)Facultad de Enfermera, Universidad de Cantabria, Nursing Research Group
IDIVAL, Cantabria, Spain. Electronic address: carmen.sarabia@unican.es.
(4)Escuela de Enfermería La Fe, Centro adscrito Universitat de València,
València, Spain; Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria IIS La Fe, Grupo de
Investigación GREIACC, València, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The sense of coherence (SOC) of the salutogenic health model explains
why people in stressful situations are able to maintain or even improve their
health. There are some studies on which measures are more effective to reduce
stress in Nursing assistant students. There are no studies that link SOC with the
two key aspects in the prevention of stress in Nursing assistant students: the
motivation of pursuing this profession and the academic level.
OBJECTIVES: To explore the salutogenic paradigm among Nursing assistant students 
in a region of Spain (Comunitat Valenciana).
DESIGN: Cross-sectional, analytical and exploratory study carried out in 2016.
METHODS: Students of the first year of Nursing Assistant certification.
Self-administered questionnaire to collect the variables: Sense of Coherence
(SOC-13 instrument); professional vocation; Self-reported grades of the academic 
record.
RESULTS: The mean score for the total SOC measurement was M = 56.38 (SD = 12.236;
71). Regarding the SOC components, the average score was for Manageability
M = 16.45 (SD = 4.53; 24); Comprehensibility M = 19.27 (SD = 5.642; 30) and
Meaningfulness M = 20.65 (SD = 4.48; 23). Students who lived in rural
environments presented a weaker SOC (M = 54.05), compared to those who were
located in urban environments (M = 56.83) and large cities (M = 56.15). The
students who reported a choice of studies motivated by professional vocation
presented a stronger SOC, scoring also a remarkable academic performance
(p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Strong levels of SOC in Nursing assistant students, are related to a
greater motivation to study something desirable, and to obtaining high academic
performance, despite being a demanding and high-stress profession. Therefore, a
strong SOC seems to contribute to being more resistant to stress. The
environments that provide and facilitate greater external resources such as
health, education, culture, association, leisure and recreation, for the
community, have higher global levels of sense of coherence.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nedt.2019.05.004 
PMID: 31078870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019 May 8;16(9). pii: E1611. doi:
10.3390/ijerph16091611.

Exploring the Relationship between Urban Quiet Areas and Perceived Restorative
Benefits.

Payne SR(1), Bruce N(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Urban Institute, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh EH14 4AS, UK.
S.R.Payne@hw.ac.uk.
(2)The Urban Institute, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh EH14 4AS, UK.
N.Bruce@hw.ac.uk.

To help mitigate the adverse health impacts of environmental noise, European
cities are recommended to identify urban quiet areas for preservation. Procedures
for identifying urban quiet areas vary across cities and between countries, and
little is known of the strength of the salutogenic (health-promoting) benefits
they may provide. Taking a multi-site approach, this study examines the potential
of three sites as urban quiet areas and their associated health benefits,
particularly in relation to perceived restorative benefits. Across three cities
in the United Kingdom, an urban garden, urban park, and an urban square had sound
pressure levels measured. Responses from 151 visitors to these sites evaluated
the place as quiet, calm, and tranquil, and assessed their experience of the
place in terms of perceived sounds, its benefits, how it made them feel, and
perceived restoration. Depending on the criteria used, the sites varied in their 
suitability as urban quiet areas, although all provided perceived health
benefits. Relationships between sound levels (subjective and objective) and
perceived restoration were not linear, with the type of sounds heard and other
aspects of the place experience believed to affect the relationship. Building on 
this work, a future experimental approach based on the study sites is planned to 
manipulate the multiple variables involved. This will provide a clearer
understanding of the relationship between urban quiet areas and perceived
restorative benefits.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph16091611 
PMCID: PMC6539848
PMID: 31071957  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Health Promot Int. 2020 Jun 1;35(3):586-597. doi: 10.1093/heapro/daz038.

Association between sense of coherence and dental caries: systematic review and
meta-analysis.

Torres TAP(1), Corradi-Dias L(1), Oliveira PD(2), Martins CC(1), Paiva SM(1),
Pordeus IA(1), Abreu LG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry and Orthodontics, Universidade Federal de
Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(2)Department of Dentistry, Faculdade Arnaldo, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais,
Brazil.

Sense of coherence (SOC) is regarded as the individuals' capacity for managing
the stressors over their lifespan. The aim of this systematic review and
meta-analysis was to evaluate the association between SOC and dental caries.
Electronic searchers were conducted in six databases: PubMed, Medline, Scopus,
Web of Science, Lilacs and Proquest from their date of inception until
November/2017. An update took place in August/2018. A hand search in the
reference list of the included articles and gray literature search were also
carried out. Retrieved titles/abstracts were screened by two review authors. Data
of the included articles were extracted and quality assessment was also
conducted. The first search retrieved 346 titles/abstracts. The update retrieved 
33 records. Following the removal of 70 duplicates, 309 references were screened 
and 17 were included. The quality assessment ranged from low quality articles to 
high quality articles. High quality study showed that adult individuals with
lower SOC were more likely to have dental caries. Meta-analysis showed that
adolescents with low SOC were 5.41 times more likely to present dental caries
than adolescents with high SOC (CI = 2.15-13.59). Mothers with low SOC were 5.55 
times more likely to have children/adolescents with dental caries than mothers
with high SOC (CI = 2.92-10.57). The subgroup analysis exploring continuous data 
showed that the SOC of mothers of children/adolescents without dental caries was 
significantly higher than the SOC of mothers of children/adolescents with dental 
caries (CI = 0.10-0.51). Higher levels of SOC seem to be associated with lower
levels of dental caries.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/daz038 
PMID: 31071224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Women Health. 2020 Jan;60(1):43-59. doi: 10.1080/03630242.2019.1610826. Epub 2019
May 8.

Sense of coherence among Bedouin women in polygamous marriages compared to women 
in monogamous marriages.

Daoud N(1), Berger-Polsky A(1), Abu-Kaf S(2), Sagy S(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of 
the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(2)Conflict Management & Resolution Program, Department of Interdisciplinary
Studies, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(3)Department of Education, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva,
Israel.

We compared sense of coherence (SOC) among Bedouin women in polygamous with those
in monogamous marriages. SOC is a global orientation toward life as
comprehensible, manageable, and meaningful, and is derived from generalized
resistance resources that promote effective coping in stressful life situations. 
Strong SOC may be a resource for strengthening resilience and promoting health.
We administered questionnaires to 464 Indigenous Arab Bedouin women (ages 18-49
years) in 2008-2009 using the 13-item SOC questionnaire. Contrary to our
hypothesis, SOC was higher among women in polygamous compared to monogamous
marriages. Husband's education, husband's abandonment of the household, living in
unrecognized villages, and low mastery (perception of one's ability to control
life situations) were associated with higher SOC. These results might suggest
that polygamy may provoke new coping mechanisms among women as they reappraise
life amidst low mastery, accept cultural norms, and marshal new resources,
thereby increasing key elements of SOC, including comprehensibility,
manageability, and meaningfulness. Interventions and services seeking to empower 
women in polygamous marriages should build on their resilience.

DOI: 10.1080/03630242.2019.1610826 
PMID: 31068120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Cien Saude Colet. 2019 Apr;24(4):1327-1346. doi:
10.1590/1413-81232018244.09692017. Epub 2019 May 2.

[Integrative review: psychological distress among university students and
correlated factors].

[Article in Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the publisher]

Graner KM(1), Cerqueira ATAR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Neurologia e Psiquiatria, Faculdade de Medicina de Botucatu,
Universidade Estadual Paulista Júlio de Mesquita Filho. Av. Prof. Mário Rubens
Guimarães Montenegro s/n, Distrito de Rubião Júnior. 18618-970 Botucatu SP
Brasil. kmendesgra@gmail.com.

This review sought to identify risk factors and protection from psychic distress 
among university students. Empirical studies were analyzed in the Web of Science,
Medline and Scopus databases. A total of 1,375 articles were located, and after
the exclusion criteria were applied, 37 articles made up the final sample, most
of which were cross-sectional studies published in the last five years, in
developed countries and with students in the health area. The most frequently
used instruments for psychic distress screening were the General Health
Questionnaire and the Self Reporting Questionnaire, which identified a prevalence
of between 18.5% and 49.1% and, as risk factors, conditions related to academic
life (24) and to health (22). Twelve studies identified as protective factors:
given coping strategies, sense of coherence, self-efficacy, vigor, self-esteem,
resilience, among other psychological conditions. This review singles out
directions for possible interventions that could contribute to the well-being of 
students and to stimulate more positive experiences in the educational
environment.

Publisher: Esta revisão propôs-se a identificar fatores de risco e proteção para 
sofrimento psíquico em estudantes universitários. Analisaram-se estudos empíricos
nas bases de dados: Web of Science, Medline e Scopus. Foram localizados 1375
artigos e, aplicados os critérios de exclusão, 37 artigos compuseram a amostra
final, tendo sido a maioria estudos transversais, publicados nos últimos cinco
anos, em países desenvolvidos, com estudantes da área da saúde. Os instrumentos
mais utilizados para o rastreamento de sofrimento psíquico foram o General Health
Questionnaire e o Self Reporting Questionnarie, que identificaram prevalências de
18,5% a 49,1% e, como fatores de risco, condições relativas à vida acadêmica (24)
e à saúde (22). Foram identificadas como fatores de proteção, em doze estudos,
apresentar determinadas estratégias de coping, senso de coerência, autoeficácia, 
vigor, autoestima, resiliência, entre outras condições psicológicas. Essa revisão
aponta direções para possíveis intervenções que poderiam contribuir para o bem
estar dos estudantes e para estimular vivências mais positivas no ambiente
educacional.
DOI: 10.1590/1413-81232018244.09692017 
PMID: 31066836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


123. BMJ Open. 2019 May 6;9(5):e026129. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-026129.

Validity of the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) in
Eritrean refugees living in Ethiopia.

Getnet B(1)(2), Alem A(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, College of Health Sciences, School of Medicine,
Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia.
(3)Consultant Psychiatrist, Amanuel Hospital, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

BACKGROUND: Depression is among the top mental health problems with a major
contribution to the global burden of disease. This study aimed at identifying the
latent factor structure and construct validity of the Center for Epidemiologic
Studies Depression (CES-D) Scale.
PARTICIPANTS AND SETTING: A cross-sectional survey of 562 adults aged 18 years
and above who were randomly selected from the Eritrean refugee community living
in the Mai-Aini refugee camp, Ethiopia.
MEASURES: The CES-D Scale, Primary Care PTSD (PC-PTSD) screener, premigration and
postmigration living difficulties checklist, Oslo Social Support Scale (OSS-3),
Sense of Coherence Scale (SoC-13), Coping Style Scale and fast alcohol screening 
test (FAST) were administered concurrently. Confirmatory factor analysis was
employed to test prespecified factor structures of CES-D.
RESULT: First-order two factors with second-order common factor structure of
CES-D (correlated error terms) yielded the best fit to the data (Comparative Fit 
Index =0.975; root mean square error of approximation=0.040 [90% CI 0.032 to
0.047]). The 16 items defining depressive affect were internally consistent
(Cronbach's α=0.932) and internal consistency of the 4 items defining positive
affect was relatively weak (Cronbach's α=0.703). These two latent factors have a 
weaker standardised covariance estimate of 33% (24% for women and 40% for men),
demonstrating evidence of discriminant validity. CES-D is significantly
associated with measures of adversities, specifically, premigration living
difficulties (r=0.545, p<0.001) and postmigration living difficulties (r=0.47,
p<0.001), PC-PTSD (r=0.538, p<0.001), FAST (r=0.197, p<0.001) and
emotion-oriented coping (r=0.096, p˂0.05) providing evidence of its convergent
validity. It also demonstrated inverse association with measures of resilience
factors, specifically, SoC-13 (r=-0.597, p<0.001) and OSS-3 (r=-0.319, p<0.001). 
The two correlated factors model of CES-D demonstrated configural, metric,
scalar, error variance and structural covariance invariances (p>0.05) for both
men and women.
CONCLUSIONS: Unlike previous findings among Eritreans living in USA, second-order
two factors structure of CES-D best fitted the data for Eritrean refugees living 
in Ethiopia; this implies that it is important to address culture for the
assessment and intervention of depression.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-026129 
PMCID: PMC6528005
PMID: 31064806  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


124. PLoS One. 2019 May 6;14(5):e0215371. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0215371.
eCollection 2019.

Quality of delivery of "right@home": Implementation evaluation of an Australian
sustained nurse home visiting intervention to improve parenting and the home
learning environment.

Kemp L(1), Bruce T(1), Elcombe EL(1), Anderson T(2), Vimpani G(3), Price
A(4)(5)(6), Smith C(7), Goldfeld S(4)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing and Midwifery, Western Sydney University, Ingham Institute
for Applied Medical Research, Liverpool, New South Wales, Australia.
(2)Sydney Local Health District, Camperdown, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Community Child and Family Health, University of Newcastle, Regional and Rural
Health Services, Hunter New England Local Health District, New Lambton, New South
Wales, Australia.
(4)Centre for Community Child Health, The Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia.
(5)Population Health, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia.
(6)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia.
(7)Australian Research Alliance for Children and Youth, Canberra City, Australian
Capital Territory, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Home visiting programs are implemented in high income countries to
improve outcomes for families with young children. Significant resources are
invested in such programs and high quality evaluations are important. In the
context of research trials, implementation quality is often poorly reported and, 
when reported, is variable. This paper presents the quality of implementation of 
the right@home program, a sustained nurse home visiting intervention trialled in 
Australia, and delivered in a 'real world' context through usual child and family
health services. right@home is structured around the core Maternal Early
Childhood Sustained Home-visiting (MECSH) program, which is a salutogenic, child 
focused prevention model.
METHOD: At each visit right@home practitioners completed a checklist detailing
the client unique identifier, date of contact and activities undertaken. These
checklists were collated to provide data on intervention dose, retention to
program completion at child age 2 years, and visit content, which were compared
with the program schedule. Quality of family-provider relationship was measured
using the Session Rating Scale. Exploratory factor analysis was conducted to
identify clusters of activities and allow qualitative assessment of concordance
between program aims and program delivery.
RESULTS: Of 363 intervention families offered the program, 352 (97·0%) commenced 
the program and 304 (87·3%) completed the program to child age 2 years. 253 of
352 (71·9%) families who commenced the program received more than 75 percent of
scheduled visits including at least one antenatal visit. Families rated the
participant-practitioner relationship highly (mean 39.4/40). The factor analysis 
identified six antenatal and six postnatal components which were concordant with 
the program aims.
CONCLUSIONS: The right@home program was delivered with higher adherence to
program dose, schedule and content, and retention than usually reported in other 
home visiting research. Program compliance may have resulted from program design 
(visit schedule, dose, content and delivery flexibility) that was consistent with
family aims.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0215371 
PMCID: PMC6502332
PMID: 31059504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist. The MECSH® program is a registered trademark of UNSW Australia
and from 2016 for the duration of 5 years is being sublicensed to Western Sydney 
University. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing
data and materials.


125. Disabil Rehabil. 2020 Dec;42(26):3780-3792. doi: 10.1080/09638288.2019.1610511.
Epub 2019 May 6.

Illness perceptions and psychological adjustment among persons with multiple
sclerosis: the mediating role of coping strategies and social support.

Bassi M(1), Cilia S(2), Falautano M(3), Grobberio M(4), Niccolai C(5), Pattini
M(6), Pietrolongo E(7), Quartuccio ME(8), Viterbo RG(9), Allegri B(6), Amato
MP(5)(10), Benin M(4), De Luca G(7), Gasperini C(8), Minacapelli E(3), Patti
F(2), Trojano M(9), Delle Fave A(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences L. Sacco, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.
(2)Multiple Sclerosis Center, University Polyclinic Hospital G. Rodolico,
Catania, Italy.
(3)Neurological Department, San Raffaele Hospital, Milano, Italy.
(4)Lab of Clinical Neuropsychology - Psychology Unit, ASST Lariana, Como, Italy.
(5)IRCCS Fondazione Don Carlo Gnocchi, Florence, Italy.
(6)Multiple Sclerosis Center - Neurology Unit, Hospital of Vaio, Fidenza, Italy.
(7)Department of Neurosciences, Imaging and Clinical Sciences, University G.
d'Annunzio, Chieti, Italy.
(8)Department of Neuroscience, San Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(9)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Neurosciences and Sense Organs,
University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
(10)Department of NEUROFARBA - Section of Neurosciences, University of Florence, 
Florence, Italy.
(11)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan,
Milan, Italy.

Purpose: The aim of this study was to test the Common Sense Model of
Self-Regulation among persons with multiple sclerosis (MS), hypothesizing direct 
relations between illness beliefs and psychological adjustment, and indirect
relations through coping strategies and social support.Materials and methods:
Questionnaires were administered cross-sectionally to 680 participants
(Mage =40.1; 64.4% women) recruited in eight MS units to assess illness beliefs, 
coping strategies, social support, and adjustment indicators including life
satisfaction, psychological well-being, mental health, and depression. Multiple
mediational analyses were conducted to identify direct and indirect paths
connecting illness beliefs to psychological outcomes.Results: Controlling for
disability level, significant direct and indirect relationships were observed:
Beliefs on illness coherence, personal and treatment control were associated with
better adjustment; emotion representations and cyclic timeline with worse
adjustment; illness identity, consequences, psychological and chance/bad luck
causes with mixed positive and negative outcomes. Notably, findings identified
recurrent and unique pathways connecting illness beliefs to the different
indicators through meaning- and problem-focused coping strategies, avoidance and 
social support.Conclusions: The Common Sense Model can represent a useful
framework to be tested in rehabilitation programs, jointly addressing illness
beliefs and coping resources for the promotion of psychological adjustment among 
persons with MS.IMPLICATIONS FOR REHABILITATIONBased on the Common Sense Model,
the beliefs held by persons with MS about their illness are related to various
aspects of psychological adjustment in multiple ways, both directly and
indirectly through engagement in specific coping strategies and perception of
social support.Clinicians supporting patients' adjustment may take into account
that some illness beliefs were consistently associated with positive adjustment, 
some with poor adjustment, and some yielded mixed positive and negative
results.Some ways in which coping strategies and social support connected illness
beliefs to psychological adjustment were specific to the adjustment indicator
under consideration including satisfaction with life, psychological well-being,
mental health and depression.It may be worth testing comprehensive psychological 
interventions with the aim of raising awareness of one's illness beliefs, the
strategies enacted in response to these beliefs, and the positive and negative
relations of these processes with psychological adjustment, encompassing broad
areas of individuals' lives and not only health-related issues or depression.

DOI: 10.1080/09638288.2019.1610511 
PMID: 31056979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2019 Oct;46(5):724-733. doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2019.02.002. Epub 
2019 May 1.

Association between Ménière's disease and vestibular migraine.

Pyykkö I(1), Manchaiah V(2), Färkkilä M(3), Kentala E(4), Zou J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Hearing and Balance Research Unit, University of
Tampere, Tampere, Finland. Electronic address: http://ilmari.pyykkotuni.fi.
(2)Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences, Lamar University, Beaumont, Texas, 
United States; Department of Speech and Hearing, School of Allied Health
Sciences, Manipal University, Manipal, Karnataka, India; Audiology India, Mysore,
Karnataka, India.
(3)Helsinki Headache Centre, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki
University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology, Hearing and Balance Research Unit, University of
Tampere, Tampere, Finland; Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University of
Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland; Department of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Center for Otolaryngology-Head & Neck
Surgery of Chinese PLA, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to evaluate complaints in people with
Ménière's disease (MD) with and without migraine and headache to study the
association between MD and Vestibular Migraine (VM). We believe this will help us
understand if these two disorders represent a disease continuum in that they may 
share a common aetiology.
METHODS: The study used a retrospective design and included data of 911 patients 
with MD from the Finnish Ménière Federation database. The study participants had 
a mean age of 60.2 years, mean duration of disease of 12.6 years, and 78.7% of
the participants were females. The questionnaire data comprised of both disease
specific and impact related questions. The data were analyzed using the
Mann-Whitney U test, the Kruskal Wallis H test, logistic regression analyses, and
decision tree analysis.
RESULTS: Migraine and headache was reported by 190 subjects (20.9%) and 391
subjects (42.9%) respectively. We found that patients that could be classified as
VM in the study (i.e., those with frequent vertigo spells associated with
migraine) more often reported complaints of severe MD symptoms, had reduced
health-related quality of life, suffered more from anxiety, had more neurological
complaints, and experienced a reduced sense of coherence than the non-migraneous 
patients with MD. However, neither the decision tree analysis nor the logistic
regression analysis could reliably discriminate VM from MD patients.
CONCLUSION: Our study results confirm that MD is frequently associated with
headache and migraine. In addition, results also indicate that migraine provokes 
the severity of MD. We suggest that MD and VM may share similar
pathophysiological mechanisms. Hence, the future MD classification systems should
include a category referred to as 'MD with migraine' that will include patients
with VM.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anl.2019.02.002 
PMID: 31054848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Personal Disord. 2019 Jul;10(4):389-393. doi: 10.1037/per0000338. Epub 2019 Apr
29.

Inpatient adolescents with borderline personality disorder features: Identity
diffusion and narrative incoherence.

Lind M(1), Vanwoerden S(1), Penner F(1), Sharp C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology.

Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is a severe disorder with poor prognosis.
Therefore, a growing number of researchers emphasize the need to evaluate
correlates of BPD present during adolescence that can be identified and targeted 
to prevent exacerbation over time. A core feature of BPD is a disturbed sense of 
self; however, such disturbances can manifest themselves in different ways in
adolescence. In this study, we examined whether such disturbances would appear
through self-reported identity disturbance and more indirectly through incoherent
oral narratives, rated based on the content derived from the Child Attachment
Interview. Thus, higher levels of identity diffusion and lower levels of
narrative coherence of past events were expected to associate with BPD features
in 70 inpatient adolescents. Findings confirmed hypotheses; however, when
considering covariance between narrative coherence and identity diffusion, only
identity diffusion remained significant. Findings are discussed in terms of how
both constructs might be underlying mechanisms of a disturbed sense of self in
BPD and how they speak to future treatment and a more dimensional
conceptualization of personality disorders. (PsycINFO Database Record (c) 2019
APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/per0000338 
PMID: 31033329  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Front Psychol. 2019 Apr 11;10:819. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00819. eCollection
2019.

Family Socioeconomic Status and Adolescent Depressive Symptoms in a Chinese Low- 
and Middle- Income Sample: The Indirect Effects of Maternal Care and Adolescent
Sense of Coherence.

Xu F(1), Cui W(1), Xing T(1), Parkinson M(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, Shandong Normal University, Jinan, China.
(2)School of Psychology and Clinical Language Sciences, University of Reading,
Reading, United Kingdom.

The current study investigated whether socioeconomic status (SES) was associated 
with adolescent depressive symptoms through maternal parenting and adolescent
sense of coherence (SOC). Using a sample of 1220 Chinese adolescents, it was
found that SES, maternal care, and adolescent SOC were positively related to each
other and negatively related to adolescent depressive symptoms, respectively.
Maternal control was positively related to adolescent depressive symptoms and
negatively related to their SOC, but not significantly to SES. By analysis of
structural equation modeling, we found that SES was associated with adolescent
depressive symptoms indirectly through maternal care separately, as well as
through maternal care and adolescent SOC sequentially. This study extended our
understanding by showing possible indirect pathways by which family contextual
factors and individual internal resources for adolescent depressive symptoms may 
operate separately and sequentially. The overall results highlighted the need to 
study adolescent depressive symptoms to find external and internal positive
factors for maintaining adolescent emotional health, especially in families with 
relatively lower income.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00819 
PMCID: PMC6470245
PMID: 31031681 


129. Sheng Wu Yi Xue Gong Cheng Xue Za Zhi. 2019 Apr 25;36(2):334-337. doi:
10.7507/1001-5515.201804005.

[Research progress on analysis methods in electroencephalography-electromyography
synchronous coupling].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Li S(1), Liu S(2), Lan H(2), Yu H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Rehabilitation Engineering and Technology, School of Medical
Instrument and Food Engineering, University of Shanghai for Science and
Technology, Shanghai 200093, P.R.China;Shanghai Engineering Research Center of
Assistive Devices, Shanghai 200093, P.R.China.
(2)Institute of Rehabilitation Engineering and Technology, School of Medical
Instrument and Food Engineering, University of Shanghai for Science and
Technology, Shanghai 200093, P.R.China.
(3)Institute of Rehabilitation Engineering and Technology, School of Medical
Instrument and Food Engineering, University of Shanghai for Science and
Technology, Shanghai 200093, P.R.China;Shanghai Engineering Research Center of
Assistive Devices, Shanghai 200093, P.R.China;Key Laboratory of Neuro-functional 
Information and Rehabilitation Engineering of the Ministry of Civil Affairs,
Shanghai 200093, P.R.China.

The motor nervous system transmits motion control information through nervous
oscillations, which causes the synchronous oscillatory activity of the
corresponding muscle to reflect the motion response information and give the
cerebral cortex feedback, so that it can sense the state of the limbs. This
synchronous oscillatory activity can reflect connectivity information of
electroencephalography-electromyography (EEG-EMG) functional coupling. The
strength of the coupling is determined by various factors including the strength 
of muscle contraction, attention, motion intention etc. It is very significant to
study motor functional evaluation and control methods to analyze the changes of
EEG-EMG synchronous coupling caused by different factors. This article mainly
introduces and compares coherence and Granger causality of linear methods, the
mutual information and transfer entropy of nonlinear methods in EEG-EMG
synchronous coupling, and summarizes the application of each method, so that
researchers in related fields can understand the current research progress on
analysis methods of EEG-EMG synchronous systematically.

Publisher:
运动神经系统通过神经振荡活动传递运动控制信息，从而引起相应肌肉的同步性振荡活动并反映运动响应信息，然后反馈至大脑皮层，使其能够感知肢体的状态。这种同步振荡活动可反
映皮层肌肉功能耦合的连接信息。其中，耦合的强弱由多种因素决定，包括肌肉收缩的力量、注意力、运动意图等，因此分析不同因素影响下的脑肌电信号同步耦合的强弱对运动功能评
价及控制方法等研究有重要意义。针对脑肌电信号同步耦合的分析方法，本文主要介绍与比较了线性方法中的相干性分析和格兰杰因果分析，以及非线性方法中的互信息以及传递熵，总
结了各方法在脑肌电信号同步耦合的应用研究，以便于相关领域的科研工作者更系统地了解目前脑肌电信号同步耦合分析方法的研究进展。.
DOI: 10.7507/1001-5515.201804005 
PMID: 31016953  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Int J Palliat Nurs. 2019 Apr 2;25(4):193-201. doi: 10.12968/ijpn.2019.25.4.193.

Dignity in life and care: the perspectives of Swedish patients in a palliative
care context.

Bylund-Grenklo T(1), Werkander-Harstäde C(2), Sandgren A(3), Benzein E(4),
Östlund U(5).

Author information: 
(1)Senior Lecturer, Department of Caring Science, University of Gävle, and
(affiliated) Department of Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(2)Senior Lecturer, Department of Health and Caring Sciences, Linnaeus
University, Växjö, and Center for Collaborative Palliative Care, Department of
Health and Caring Sciences, Linnaeus University, Växjö, Sweden.
(3)Associate Professor, Department of Health and Caring Sciences, Linnaeus
University, Växjö and Center for Collaborative Palliative Care, Department of
Health and Caring Sciences, Linnaeus University, Växjö, Sweden.
(4)Professor, Department of Health and Caring Sciences, Linnaeus University,
Kalmar and Center for Collaborative Palliative Care, Department of Health and
Caring Sciences, Linnaeus University, Växjö, Sweden.
(5)Associate Professor, Research Supervisor, Centre for Research and Development,
Uppsala University/Region Gävleborg, Gävle; (affiliated) Faculty of Medicine and 
Health, School of Health Sciences, Örebro University; and (affiliated) Department
of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: How patients preserve their sense of dignity in life is an important 
area of palliative care that remains to be explored.
AIMS: To describe patients' perspectives of what constitutes a dignified life
within a palliative care context.
METHODS: Twelve palliative care patients were interviewed about their views on
living with dignity. Data were analysed using qualitative content analysis.
RESULTS: What constitutes a dignified life during end-of-life care was captured
by the theme 'I may be ill but I am still a human being' and presented under the 
categories 'preserving my everyday life and personhood', 'having my human value
maintained by others through 'coherence' and 'being supported by society at
large'.
CONCLUSION: Patients' sense of dignity can be preserved by their own attitudes
and behaviours, by others and through public support. Health professionals need
to adopt a dignity-conserving approach, for which awareness of their own
attitudes and behaviours is crucial.

DOI: 10.12968/ijpn.2019.25.4.193 
PMID: 31013197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Health Promot Int. 2020 Jun 1;35(3):610-623. doi: 10.1093/heapro/daz026.

Volunteerism as adolescent health promotion asset: a scoping review.

Hernantes N(1)(2)(3), Pumar-Méndez MJ(1)(2)(4), López-Dicastillo O(1)(2)(4),
Iriarte A(1)(2)(5), Mujika A(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of Navarra, School of Nursing, Department of Community, Maternity
and Pediatric Nursing. Campus Universitario, 31008 Pamplona, Spain.
(2)ImPuLS Research Group, University of Navarra.
(3)DYA Gipuzkoa, Voluntary Association, Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain.
(4)IdiSNA, Navarra Institute for Health Research, Pamplona, Spain.
(5)Primary Care Emergency Service, Navarra Health Service - Osasunbidea,
Pamplona, Spain.

The Aim of this scoping review was to explore the available literature on
volunteerism in adolescence and the benefits that this activity may report in
their healthy development, from a salutogenic perspective. Searches were
conducted in Pubmed, Cinahl, PsycINFO and Cochrane Library home databases; 15
articles were selected. Almost all of the studies were conducted in the United
States between 1990 and 2000, primarily developed by psychologists and
sociologists. The impact of volunteering was reflected in aspects that can be
classified based on Lerner's dimensions of the PYD model. Volunteer activities
promote an Improved academic, social, cognitive, and vocational competence in
adolescents. An increase in conflict resolution capacity, leadership and personal
agency, as well as improved pro-social attitudes and relationships with adults
and peers, all of which contributed to their self-identification with the
community. Moreover, increased positive development of adolescents reduces the
rates of risky behaviors. Volunteerism may represent an opportunity for health
promotion in adolescence. The concept of volunteering as an asset for health
promotion during adolescence evokes the need to adopt and favor this view with
regard to key areas of study associated with this stage such as education and
health. Teams that work in community health, especially those in primary care,
should recognize and value existing volunteer groups as an asset to promote the
healthy development of adolescents. Friendlier health services should be
encouraged that include comprehensive services from within educational
institutions to community actions.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/daz026 
PMID: 31006021  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Curr Eye Res. 2019 Sep;44(9):1000-1005. doi: 10.1080/02713683.2019.1610179. Epub 
2019 May 8.

Anti-Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Intravitreal Therapy and Macular Ganglion
Cell Layer Thickness in Patients with Neovascular Age-Related Macular
Degeneration.

Abdolrahimzadeh S(1), Gharbiya M(2), Formisano M(2), Bertini F(2), Cerini A(2),
Pacella E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology Unit, NESMOS Department, "Sapienza" University of Rome, St.
Andrea Hospital , Rome , Italy.
(2)Ophthalmology Unit, Department of Sense Organs, "Sapienza" University of Rome,
Policlinico Umberto I , Rome , Italy.

Purpose: To assess macular ganglion cell layer (GCL) thickness in patients
treated with intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) for
exudative age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Materials and Methods: This was
a two-year retrospective institutional case series where records of patients
treated with anti-VEGF injections for unilateral AMD were reviewed for BCVA,
intraocular pressure, and spectral domain optical coherence tomography. Macular
GCL thickness was evaluated with automated retinal segmentation based on ETDRS
grid rings. Retinal layer segmentation was carefully assessed and manually
corrected for any misalignment. Results: 48 eyes of 24 patients with unilateral
exudative AMD were included. The mean number of anti-VEGF injections was 10.4 ±
3.2. Fellow eyes were classified as AREDS category one and two. There was
significant thinning of the 3-mm macular GCL in treated compared with fellow eyes
at one and two years (P = .03 and P = .04, respectively). GCL thickness compared 
to baseline showed a significant decrease at one and two years in treated (P =
.01 and <0.0001) and at two years in untreated fellow eyes (P = .02).
Conclusions: There is a decrease of macular GCL thickness in eyes with exudative 
AMD treated with anti-VEGF intravitreal injections in comparison with fellow
eyes. There is longitudinal thinning of the GCL from baseline in eyes with both
treated exudative and non-treated early AMD.

DOI: 10.1080/02713683.2019.1610179 
PMID: 30999772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2019 Jul;58(1):29-38.e2. doi:
10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2019.04.003. Epub 2019 Apr 16.

Preloss Psychosocial Resources Predict Depressive Symptom Trajectories Among
Terminally Ill Cancer Patients' Caregivers in Their First Two Years of
Bereavement.

Kuo SC(1), Wen FH(2), Chen JS(3), Chou WC(3), Shen WC(3), Tang ST(4).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, Chang Gung University,
Tao-Yuan, Taiwan; Department of Nursing, Yuanpei University of Medical
Technology, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(2)Department of International Business, Soochow University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkou,
Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkou,
Tao-Yuan, Taiwan; Department of Nursing, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at
Kaohsiung, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; School of Nursing, Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan,
Taiwan. Electronic address: sttang@mail.cgu.edu.tw.

CONTEXT: Postloss depressive symptom trajectories are heterogeneous and predicted
by preloss psychosocial resources, but this evidence was from one old study on
caregivers of patients with terminal cancer for whom these issues are highly
relevant.
OBJECTIVES: To identify depressive symptom trajectories among cancer patients'
bereaved caregivers and examine if they are predicted by preloss psychosocial
resources while considering caregiving burden.
METHODS: Preloss psychosocial resources (sense of coherence and social support)
were measured among 282 caregivers. Depressive symptoms were measured by the
Center for Epidemiological Studies-Depression scale at one, three, six, 13, 18,
and 24 months after loss (Center for Epidemiological Studies-Depression scores
≥16 indicate severe depressive symptoms). Distinct depressive symptom
trajectories and their predictors were identified by latent-class growth
analysis.
RESULTS: We identified five depressive symptom trajectories (prevalence):
endurance (47.2%), resilience (16.7%), transient reaction (20.2%), prolonged
symptomatic (11.7%), and chronically distressed (4.2%). Over two years after
loss, the endurance group never experienced severe depressive symptoms. Severe
depressive symptoms lasted six, seven to 12, and 18 months for the resilience,
transient-reaction, and prolonged-symptomatic groups, respectively. The
chronically distressed group's severe depressive symptoms persisted. The
endurance and chronically distressed groups had the best and weakest
psychological resources, respectively. Endurance-group caregivers perceived the
greatest social support, whereas the resilience and transient-reaction groups had
higher social support than the prolonged-symptomatic group.
CONCLUSIONS: Most (84.1%) caregivers' depressive symptoms subsided within one
year after loss. Preloss psychosocial resources predicted depressive symptom
trajectories for bereaved caregivers. Health care professionals can help
caregivers adjust their bereavement by providing support to enhance their sense
of coherence and encouraging social contacts while they are providing end-of-life
care.

Copyright © 2019 American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine. Published
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2019.04.003 
PMID: 30999066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Acta Biomed. 2019 Mar 28;90(4-S):25-31. doi: 10.23750/abm.v90i4-S.8261.

Association between burnout and sense of coherence among speech and language
therapists: an exploratory study in Italy.

Galletta M(1), Portoghese I, Frau N, Pau M, Meloni F, Finco G, Contu P, Campagna 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences and Public Health, University of Cagliari,
Italy. igor.portoghese@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Job burnout has been recognized as a serious occupational
hazard among professionals, such as health care professionals. The sense of
coherence (SoC) is deemed to be a personal resource capable of reducing the
impact of job stressors and, consequently, the experience of job burnout. The
purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship between SoC and job
burnout among speech and language therapists.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A descriptive and cross-sectional analysis was carried out
through an online self-reported questionnaire. A total of 217 Italian speech and 
language therapists were involved in the study. The Anova test, T-test and
logistic regression were performed to study the association between SoC and job
burnout.
RESULTS: The Anova test showed that job tenure was not associated to job burnout.
The T-test showed that speech and language therapists having a low SoC exhibited 
significantly higher emotional exhaustion, higher cynicism, and lower
professional efficacy (t=-7.190 d.f.=215 p<.001) when compared to those having a 
high SoC. Finally, the odds ratio showed that low SoC was associated with high
emotional exhaustion (OR=11.86; 95% CI=5.52-25.49; p<0.05), low SoC was
associated with high cynicism (OR=4.41, CI=2.50-7.80; p<0.05), and low SoC was
associated with low personal efficacy (OR=4.70; CI=2.59-8.52; p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Our results are in line with previous studies which showed that SoC
is a fundamental personal resource which may activate workers' reaction to
various stressors, thus reducing the experience of burnout.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v90i4-S.8261 
PMCID: PMC6625562
PMID: 30977746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2018 Dec 19;90:e1-e4.

[Salutogenesis and community self-care: also a nurse responsibility].

[Article in Spanish]

Colomer-Pérez N(1)(2), Gea-Caballero V(3)(4), Chover-Sierra E(1),
Paredes-Carbonell JJ(1)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Facultat d'Infermeria i Podologia. Universitat de València. València. España.
(2)Instituto Universitario de Investigación en Tráfico y Seguridad Vial (INTRAS) 
Universitat de València. Valencia. España.
(3)Escuela Enfermería La Fe, centro adscrito Universitat de València. Valencia.
España.
(4)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria IIS La Fe. GREIACC. Valencia. España.
(5)Centre de Salut Pública d'Alzira. Conselleria de Sanitat Universal i Salut
Pública. Alzira. Valencia.España.
(6)Fundació per al Foment de la Investigació Sanitària i Biomèdica de la
Comunitat Valenciana (FISA-BIO). Valencia. España.


PMID: 30971682 


136. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019 Apr 9;16(7). pii: E1266. doi:
10.3390/ijerph16071266.

Resilience, Sense of Coherence, and Coping with Stress as Predictors of
Psychological Well-Being in the Course of Schizophrenia. The Study Design.

Izydorczyk B(1), Sitnik-Warchulska K(2), Kühn-Dymecka A(3), Lizińczyk S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Psychology, Faculty of Management and Social
Communication, Jagiellonian University in Krakow, Krakow 30-348, Poland.
bernadetta.izydorczyk@uj.edu.pl.
(2)Institute of Applied Psychology, Faculty of Management and Social
Communication, Jagiellonian University in Krakow, Krakow 30-348, Poland.
k.sitnikwarchulska@gmail.com.
(3)Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw 02-957, Poland.
a.a.dymecka@gmail.com.
(4)Katowice Faculty of Psychology, SWPS University of Social Sciences and
Humanities, Katowice 40-326, Poland. octans@wp.pl.

The main research objective was seeking for the predictive role of such personal 
resources as resilience, sense of coherence, and coping with stress in
psychological well-being of schizophrenia patients and their treatment. The study
group comprised 201 individuals with schizophrenia, aged between 18 and 62. The
following instruments were used: The sense of coherence scale SOC-29, The
resilience scale for adults, polish adaptation of the stress appraisal measure,
semistructured clinical interview, the positive and negative syndrome scale, the 
mood scale, and the general health questionnaire. A stepwise regression analysis 
aimed at selecting a group of significant predictors for the verified factors of 
psychological well-being in patients suffering from schizophrenia was carried
out. The results of the study demonstrated the following to be significant
predictors of psychological well-being in patients with schizophrenia: Resilience
(explaining significantly the level of schizophrenic symptomatology Beta = -0.30,
negative symptoms Beta = -0.385, and cognitive disorders Beta = -0.303), sense of
coherence, which significantly predicted mood (in the case of manageability, Beta
= 0.580 for positive mood, and Beta = 0.534 for negative mood) and psychiatric
symptomatology (comprehensibility, Beta = 0.311 for negative symptoms, Beta =
0.173 for excessive arousal, and Beta = 0.330 for cognitive disorganization). The
level of perceived stress appraised as challenge predicted positive mood (Beta = 
0.164), while stress appraisal in terms of threat served as a predictor for
negative mood and depressiveness (Beta = 0.190). The study results can prove
helpful in creating therapeutic and programs and psychiatric rehabilitation for
patients with schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph16071266 
PMCID: PMC6480495
PMID: 30970589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. PLoS One. 2019 Apr 10;14(4):e0214082. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0214082.
eCollection 2019.

The psychometric properties of a new oral health illness perception measure for
adults aged 62 years and older.

Nelson S(1), Albert JM(2), Liu Y(2), Selvaraj D(1), Curtan S(1), Ryan K(2), Pinto
A(1), Ejaz F(3), Milgrom P(4), Riedy C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Case Western Reserve University School of Dental Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio,
United States of America.
(2)Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, United
States of America.
(3)Benjamin Rose Institute on Aging, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.
(4)University of Washington School of Dentistry, Seattle, Washington, United
States of America.
(5)Harvard School of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: Based on the Common-Sense Model of Self-Regulation (CSM), a new
integrated Illness Perception Questionnaire Revised for Dental Use in Older/Elder
Adults (IPQ-RDE) was developed for single and multiple dental conditions. This
study describes psychometric properties of the IPQ-RDE for adults 62 years and
older.
METHODS: Participants (n = 198) living in 16 subsidized housing facilities
completed the IPQ-RDE and a questionnaire assessing their socio-demographics,
frequency of dental visits, perceived condition of teeth/gums, depression, social
support, and oral health quality of life (OHQOL). Participants received dental
screening for presence/absence of teeth, coronal and root caries, and
periodontitis. The 43-item IPQ-RDE was tested for internal (construct,
discriminant) and external validity (concurrent, construct, discriminant,
predictive) and reliability (internal consistency).
RESULTS: Confirmatory factor analysis demonstrated that a ten-factor model in
accordance with the CSM framework (identity, consequences, control, timeline,
illness coherence, treatment burden, prioritization, causal relationship,
activity restriction, emotional representations) had good construct validity
based on significant factor loadings and acceptable model fit (RMSEA = 0.065, CFI
= 0.902). Edentulous participants had significantly higher mean factor scores
(inaccurate perception) for overall IPQ-RDE and four constructs indicating
concurrent validity. Discriminant validity was suggested by non-relationship with
external measures (education, dental visit frequency). Predictive validity was
indicated by the negative correlation of most constructs with OHQOL suggesting
that inaccurate perception was related to lower quality of life. Internal
consistency of eight IPQ-RDE constructs was excellent (Cronbach's alpha > 0.73).
CONCLUSIONS: The IPQ-RDE is a valid and reliable new measure for assessing older 
adult's perception of dental conditions. It can be an important tool for oral
health behavioral research to restructure older adult's perception of dental
conditions, and subsequently prevent tooth loss and improve oral health quality
of life.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0214082 
PMCID: PMC6457485
PMID: 30970021  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


138. Perspect Med Educ. 2019 Apr;8(2):98-100. doi: 10.1007/s40037-019-0507-4.

From semi-conscious to strategic paragraphing.

Lingard L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Health Sciences Addition, Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, Western
University, London, ON, Canada. lorelei.lingard@schulich.uwo.ca.

DOI: 10.1007/s40037-019-0507-4 
PMCID: PMC6468037
PMID: 30969401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. BMC Pediatr. 2019 Apr 8;19(1):99. doi: 10.1186/s12887-019-1458-y.

From uncertainty to gradually managing and awaiting recovery of a periodic
condition- a qualitative study of parents´ experiences of PFAPA syndrome.

Sparud-Lundin C(1), Berg S(2), Fasth A(2), Karlsson A(3), Wekell P(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health and Care Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Box 457, SE-, 405 30, Gothenburg, Sweden. carina.s-lundin@fhs.gu.se.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Department of Rheumatology and Inflammation Research, Institute of Medicine
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, NU-Hospital Group, Uddevalla, Sweden.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Clinical Sciences, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis
and cervical adenitis (PFAPA) syndrome is unknown. Although an uncommon
condition, it is considered to be the most common autoinflammatory disease among 
children in many parts of the world. The knowledge of the consequences of the
recurrent fever episodes for the child and its family are limited. This study
explores the experiences of parents regarding the impact of the disease on the
child's general well-being, the family's situation and how the family handles the
associated challenges.
METHODS: A qualitative approach was used, applying a modified version of Grounded
theory for design, data collection and analysis. Data was collected from two
different sources: communication between parents of children with PFAPA in a
closed Facebook group and face-to face interviews with one of the parents of
children diagnosed with PFAPA (6 mothers and 2 fathers).
RESULTS: Parents described a lengthy process of how everyday life becomes
affected by their child's recurrent fever episodes. This process is depicted in
the following Grounded Theory core category: From uncertainty to gradually
managing and awaiting recovery. The categories Uncertainty, Assurance, Gradually 
managing and Recovery describe the experienced illness trajectory. The illness
representation illustrates the experiences/impacts of the periodic condition in
the subcategories: Harmlessness-Severity, Disclosure of diagnosis, Impact on
daily life and Regularity-Unpredictability. The children's well-being was highly 
affected by the symptoms during episodes. Parents experienced increased stress
with constant fatigue, social constraints of family life and restricted career
opportunities. Nevertheless, hope of recovery was constantly present.
CONCLUSIONS: PFAPA is associated with a considerable burden on the child and the 
parents in daily life. Obtaining a diagnosis enables parents to move from a state
of uncertainty towards a sense of coherence while awaiting recovery. Because of
limited general knowledge of the condition and its impact on daily life, health
care professionals need to become aware of the parents' efforts to mitigate the
consequences of the recurrent episodes for the child and for the family as a
whole.

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-019-1458-y 
PMCID: PMC6454720
PMID: 30961562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Perspect Public Health. 2019 May;139(3):131-136. doi: 10.1177/1757913919836145.
Epub 2019 Apr 8.

Culture Vitamins - an Arts on Prescription project in Denmark.

Jensen A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Postdoc, Centre for Culture and Health, Department of Communication and
Psychology, Aalborg University, A.C. Meyers Vænge 15, 2450 Copenhagen SV,
Denmark.

AIMS: Four Arts on Prescription (AoP) projects are piloting in Denmark between
2016 and 2019. One of the local authorities delivering the project is Aalborg.
The AoP project 'Culture Vitamins' runs for 10 weeks and offers a variety of
cultural activities averaging 2.5 workshops per week for participants with mild
to moderate depression, stress or anxiety. The study aims to evaluate and explore
the potential mental health wellbeing benefits for the participants.
METHOD: A qualitative approach with semi-structured interviews was used and
included seven participants who were referred to the project by the local job
centre. A thematic approach was applied to analyse the data and a theoretical
lens of Salutogenesis was employed to explore the findings.
FINDINGS: The findings associated with mental health and the themes that emerged 
from the data described the participants' subjective experiences and were (1)
positive changes, (2) overcoming challenges and being in the 'space' and (3)
moving from self-critical to self-caring. The reported mental health benefits
were increased energy level, increased self-esteem, more joy in life, less panic 
attacks, increased motivation, a better understanding of own needs, an increased 
level of self-care and, in addition, some of the participants said that they felt
more aligned to the labour market.
CONCLUSIONS: The AoP project offered value and meaning for the participants and
can be seen as a motivating tool that created access to new experiences and
understandings by means of arts engagement. The 'Culture Vitamins' project can be
regarded as a catalyst for connecting with inner resources and unlocking some of 
the barriers that mental ill health has created. The experience has shifted the
participants' experience of themselves in the world and initiated their
motivation for the future. The 'Culture Vitamins' project offered a positive
contribution to public health challenges associated with stress, anxiety and
depression of individuals.

DOI: 10.1177/1757913919836145 
PMID: 30955476  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Psychiatry Res. 2019 May;275:345-350. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2019.04.005. Epub
2019 Apr 3.

Humour processing deficits in individuals with social anhedonia.

Liu BH(1), Huang J(2), Shan HD(3), Liu YF(3), Lui SSY(4), Cheung EFC(4), Yue
XD(5), Chan RCK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neuropsychology and Applied Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory, CAS Key
Laboratory of Mental Health, Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China; Department of Psychology, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Neuropsychology and Applied Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory, CAS Key
Laboratory of Mental Health, Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China; Department of Psychology, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China. Electronic address: huangj@psych.ac.cn.
(3)Translational Neuropsychology and Applied Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory,
Shanghai Mental Health Centre, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, China.
(4)Castle Peak Hospital, Hong Kong Special Administration Region, China.
(5)Department of Applied Social Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Special Administration Region, China.

Humour processing comprises the humour comprehension and the humour appreciation 
phases. Patients with schizophrenia have impaired humour processing. However, it 
is unclear whether such deficits affect subclinical populations such as
individuals with social anhedonia. Our study recruited forty-eight individuals
with high levels of social anhedonia (HSA, screened by the Revised Chapman Social
Anhedonia Scale) and 50 individuals with low levels of social anhedonia (LSA).
Participants completed behavioural tasks which tapped into humour comprehension
and appreciation, and a set of questionnaires assessing their sense of humour,
humour styles and subjective experiential pleasure. Using signal detection theory
analysis, the d' and β values were generated to measure the detection of humour
signal in the comprehension phase and the inner criteria of the humour
appreciation respectively. The results showed that the HSA and LSA groups did not
differ in humour signal detection (d') but the HSA group had significantly higher
inner criteria of humour appreciation (β) than the LSA group. The β value was
correlated with experiential anticipatory pleasure in all participants. The HSA
group had significantly lower within-group coherence than the LSA group when
processing humour. Our findings suggested that individuals with social anhedonia 
have impaired humour processing.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2019.04.005 
PMID: 30954845  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Psychosom Res. 2019 Apr;119:1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2019.01.015. Epub
2019 Jan 25.

Primary healthcare utilisation and self-rated health among patients with
Irritable Bowel Syndrome: What are the impacts of comorbidities, gastrointestinal
symptom burden, sense of coherence and stress?

Norlin AK(1), Faresjö Å(2), Falk M(2), Jones MP(3), Walter S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Community Medicine, Department of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Linköping University, Sweden. Electronic address: anna-karin.norlin@liu.se.
(2)Division of Community Medicine, Department of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Linköping University, Sweden.
(3)Psychology Department, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, Linköping University, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) is a chronic gastrointestinal disease 
associated with impaired quality of life and an increased use of healthcare
services. Self-ratings of health have proven a powerful predictor of health
outcomes. The aim of this study was to evaluate the unique impacts of
comorbidities, gastrointestinal symptoms, perceived stress and sense of coherence
on the number of healthcare contacts and self-rated health of IBS patients in
Swedish primary care.
METHODS: In this cross-sectional study, 186 primary-care IBS patients and 360
non-IBS patients (as a reference group) were administrated a test battery of
validated questionnaires. Data on comorbidities and healthcare-seeking frequency 
were obtained from a registry.
RESULTS: In the reduced multivariable logistic regression model, average days of 
abdominal pain/week (OR = 0.83, 95% CI = 0.72-0.96), age (OR = 0.95, 95%
CI = 0.92-0.97) and sense of coherence (OR = 1.07, 95% CI = 1.03-1.11) remained
independent, statistically significant predictors of IBS (and non-IBS) patients
reporting good health. Only the number of comorbidities in general (OR = 1.22,
95% CI = 1.14-1.32) and sleep disorders in particular (OR = 5.40, 95%
CI = 1.85-15.76) independently predicted high levels of primary healthcare
utilisation among IBS patients.
CONCLUSION: Lack of gastrointestinal symptoms, a high sense of coherence and
younger age were associated with better self-rated health in both IBS and non-IBS
patients. The number of comorbidities in general and sleep disorders in
particular were associated with frequent PHC contacts in IBS patients. The
association between frequent primary-care contacts and sleep disorders was not
seen in the control group, indicating a unique association with IBS patients.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2019.01.015 
PMID: 30947811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. JDR Clin Trans Res. 2019 Jul;4(3):229-238. doi: 10.1177/2380084418816984. Epub
2019 Jan 8.

Can a School-Based Intervention Improve the Oral Health-Related Quality of Life
of Brazilian Children?

Tomazoni F(1), Vettore MV(2), Baker SR(2), Ardenghi TM(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Stomatology, Faculty of Dentistry, Federal University of Santa
Maria, Santa Maria, Brazil.
(2)2 Academic Unit of Oral Health, Dentistry and Society, School of Clinical
Dentistry, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Evidence of the effectiveness of oral health promotion strategies
among children from different socioeconomic backgrounds is necessary to support
the implementation of public health interventions.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to test the effectiveness of a school-based
intervention to enhance the sense of coherence (SOC) and oral health-related
quality of life (OHRQoL) of socially vulnerable Brazilian children. Furthermore, 
we explored the pathways by which the intervention may improve OHRQoL and SOC,
assessing the direct and indirect pathways among demographic, clinical,
socioeconomic, behavioral, and psychosocial variables.
METHODS: In this cluster-randomized trial, 5 primary schools in Brazil were
randomly allocated into intervention and control groups. The intervention
comprised 7 sessions of SOC-based activities over 2 mo, which focused on making
the school environment a place to develop children's SOC through involving
teachers, school staff, and children. Trained teachers delivered the
intervention. OHRQoL and SOC data were collected at baseline, 2 wk after the
intervention, and at 3-mo follow-up.
RESULTS: Information about oral clinical conditions, socioeconomic status,
OHRQoL, and SOC was obtained from 356 children aged 8 to 14 y (165 in the
intervention group and 191 in the control group). Children from the SOC-based
intervention group reported fewer impacts of their oral health on their daily
lives (Child Perceptions Questionnaire mean, 7.22) than those from the control
group (9.14). The intervention group also reported greater improvement of SOC at 
2 wk (SOC mean, 52.98) and 3 mo (52.75) than the control group (52.21 and 51.65, 
respectively).
CONCLUSION: The intervention was effective in improving SOC and OHRQoL among
socially vulnerable Brazilian children. Moreover, SOC was a relevant predictor
for oral symptom and functional status in this population (Brazilian Clinical
Trials Registry RBR-2N9NHJ).
KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER STATEMENT: Clinicians and policy makers can use the results of
this study to decide which approach to use when planning public health policy to 
improve the SOC and OHRQoL of socially vulnerable children. Our findings can
assist policy makers in making more appropriate community health decisions in
school environments that will improve community empowerment.

DOI: 10.1177/2380084418816984 
PMID: 30931715  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Arch Psychiatr Nurs. 2019 Apr;33(2):182-188. doi: 10.1016/j.apnu.2018.12.002.
Epub 2018 Dec 19.

Health-related lifestyle and perceived health among people with severe mental
illness: Gender differences and degree of sense of coherence.

Lundström S(1), Jormfeldt H(2), Hedman Ahlström B(3), Skärsäter I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Halmstad University, School of Health and Welfare, Halmstad, Sweden.
Electronic address: sofie.lundstrom@hh.se.
(2)Halmstad University, School of Health and Welfare, Halmstad, Sweden.
(3)University West, Department of Health Sciences, Trollhättan, Sweden.

People with severe mental illness (SMI) experience an increased risk of physical 
ill health and premature death, which appears to be partly related to unhealthy
lifestyle habits. The aim of this study was to describe the distribution of
health-related lifestyle habits and perceived health among people with severe
mental illness. A further aim was to explore if there were any gender differences
or differences based on degree of sense of coherence. The study adopted a
cross-sectional design based on data from 65 people with SMI. The results show
that degree of Sense of Coherence (SOC) does have relevance for perceived health 
and for dimensions of Quality of Life (QOL). Furthermore, among the participants 
with strong SOC, there were less daily smokers and they seemed to have less
sedentary leisure time than those with low SOC. Men reported more
anxiety/depression than women and women ate fruit more often than men, otherwise 
there were no gender differences. In comparison with the general population,
people with SMI show a higher Body Mass Index are more sedentary, more often
daily smokers, have lower SOC and perceive a lower QOL. This emphasizes the
importance of health-promotion support that focuses on lifestyle changes, and
support for strengthening SOC and QOL for people with SMI.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apnu.2018.12.002 
PMID: 30927988  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Eye (Lond). 2019 Aug;33(8):1290-1296. doi: 10.1038/s41433-019-0405-3. Epub 2019
Mar 29.

Optical coherence tomography evidence of macular ganglion cell-inner plexiform
layer thinning in eyes with subretinal drusenoid deposits.

Abdolrahimzadeh S(1), Parisi F(2), Marcelli M(2), Giustolisi R(2), Gharbiya M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology Unit, NESMOS Department, St. Andrea Hospital, "Sapienza"
University of Rome, Rome, Italy. solmaz.abdolrahimzadeh@uniroma1.it.
(2)Ophthalmology Unit, Department of Sense Organs, Azienda Policlinico Umberto I,
"Sapienza "University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to evaluate macular ganglion
cell layer-inner plexiform layer (GCL-IPL) and choroidal thickness in early
age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in eyes with subretinal drusenoid deposits
(SDD).
SUBJECTS/METHODS: Comprehensive ophthalmological examination was performed. Near 
infrared reflectance and raster images using enhanced depth imaging were acquired
with spectral domain optical coherence tomography. Drusen and SDD were diagnosed 
based on raster scans and near infrared reflectance. GCL-IPL maps were generated 
with automated segmentation and choroidal thickness maps were obtained by
manually delineating the choroid-scleral boundary.
RESULTS: Forty-eight eyes from 48 patients (mean age 77.5 ± 5.7, range 68-90
years) with a diagnosis of early AMD and 42 eyes of 42 age-matched control
subjects (mean age 76.9 ± 5.7, range 67-88 years) were included. Of these, 28
eyes (58.3%) had drusen alone, 4 eyes (8.3%) had SDD alone, and 16 eyes (33.3%)
had drusen associated with SDD. Compared with controls, average choroidal
thickness was significantly decreased in AMD eyes (P < 0.05). There was no
significant difference in choroidal thickness in eyes with SDD with respect to
those with drusen alone. GCL-IPL thickness was reduced in an annular pattern at
the 3 and 6 mm macular areas in AMD patients with respect to controls (P < 0.05).
GCL-IPL thickness at 3 mm was significantly reduced in eyes with SDD with respect
to those with drusen alone (P = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: The GCL-IPL is reduced in thickness with an annular pattern in early
AMD and is significantly thinner in eyes with SDD.

DOI: 10.1038/s41433-019-0405-3 
PMCID: PMC7005878
PMID: 30926911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Front Psychiatry. 2019 Mar 12;10:88. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00088. eCollection
2019.

Short-Term Effects of a Multidimensional Stress Prevention Program on Quality of 
Life, Well-Being and Psychological Resources. A Randomized Controlled Trial.

Recabarren RE(1), Gaillard C(1), Guillod M(1), Martin-Soelch C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical and Health Psychology, IReach Lab, Department of
Psychology, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.

It is well-documented that university students have an increased risk in
developing psychological problems because they face multiple stressors.
Cognitive, behavioral, and mindfulness-based stress prevention programs were
shown to reduce symptoms of anxiety, depression, and perceived stress in
university students. However, little is known of their effect on resource
activation. Additionally, most validated interventions are unidimensional, i.e., 
including one stress-coping approach. In this study, we investigated the
short-term effects of a multidimensional stress prevention program on students'
quality of life, psychological symptoms and resources, and resilience factors
against stress. Using an experimental design, 64 healthy undergraduate students
(56 women), between 18 and 34 years old (M = 21.34, SD = 2.53), from the
University of Fribourg, Switzerland, were randomly allocated either to the
intervention or the wait-list control group. The intervention group participated 
in a multidimensional stress prevention program, integrating mindfulness-based
activities, cognitive and behavioral strategies, social skills, and emotional
regulation exercises. The program consisted of eight 2-h weekly sessions. Before 
and after the intervention, participants completed self-reported questionnaires
evaluating quality of life; psychological symptoms such as depression, anxiety,
social anxiety, and interpersonal problems; as well as psychological resources
like self-efficacy, sense of coherence, self-compassion, and social support,
presented online. A standardized clinical interview was performed at pre- and
post-measurement times. To analyze the sort-term effects of the program, we used 
mixed, two-factorial ANOVAs (per-protocol analyses). In accordance with our
hypotheses, our results showed significant reduction of psychological symptoms,
including anxiety, interpersonal problems, and symptoms of pain; a significant
increase in quality of life, sense of coherence, and self-compassion in students 
who participated in the intervention program compared to the control group, (all 
p < 0.05). No significant results were found for symptoms of depression, social
anxiety, self-efficacy, and social support. These preliminary findings indicate
specific short-term effects of our multidimensional stress prevention program on 
psychological symptoms and on quality of life as well as promising effects on
psychological resources and factors associated with resilience against stress.
Future studies should investigate the long-term effects of the intervention as
well as the effects in clinical samples.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00088 
PMCID: PMC6422882
PMID: 30914974 


147. Complement Med Res. 2019;26(4):265-275. doi: 10.1159/000496736. Epub 2019 Mar 21.

Perceived Outcomes of Spiritual Healing: Results from a Prospective Case Series.

Teut M(1), Besch F(2), Witt CM(2), Stöckigt B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Social Medicine, Epidemiology and Health Economics, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, michael.teut@charite.de.
(2)Institute for Social Medicine, Epidemiology and Health Economics, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The aims of this pilot study were to observe perceived outcomes of
spiritual healing in Germany.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this prospective case study, we performed qualitative
interviews with clients and healers about perceived outcomes of spiritual healing
treatments. A directed qualitative content analysis was used. In addition, we
applied questionnaires (WHOQOL-BREF, General Self-Efficacy Scale, Sense of
Coherence 13, SpREUK-15, intensity of complaints on visual analogue scale) at
baseline and after week 1, month 2 and month 6 which were analysed descriptively.
RESULTS: Seven healers and 7 clients participated, 42 interviews were analysed.
In the interviews, the clients described positive body sensations, greater
relaxation and well-being as short-term effects of healing treatments. Perceived 
longer-term effects were related to making significant life changes, creating new
meanings, activating resources and improving social relationships. Patients in
pain described a reduction of pain intensity. In the questionnaires, the clients 
reported improvements in quality of life and self-efficacy, to a smaller extent
improvements of intensity of complaints and sense of coherence.
CONCLUSION: The results from this pilot study could be useful to choose outcomes 
of future prospective studies with a larger sample: qualitative assessments
combined with global and broad quantitative outcomes such as quality of life,
self-efficacy and intensity of complaints could be applied.

Publisher: Hintergrund: Ziel dieser Pilotstudie war es, subjektiv wahrgenommene
Effekte des spirituellen Heilens quali­tativ und quantitativ zu erfassen.
Patienten und Metho­den: In dieser prospektiven Pilotstudie wurden über 6 Monate 
qualitative Interviews mit Klienten und Heilern über wahrgenommene Effekte
spiritueller Heilbehandlungen geführt und auf Basis einer qualitativen
Inhaltsanalyse ausgewertet. Ergebnisse wurden zusätzlich mit Fragebögen
(WHOQOL-BREF, General Self-Efficacy Scale, Sense of Coherence 13, SpREUK-15,
Beschwerdeintensität auf visueller Analogskala) zu Studienbeginn und nach der
Woche 1, Monat 2 und Monat 6 erfasst. Ergebnisse: Sieben Heiler und 7 Klienten
nahmen an dieser Studie teil, 42 ­Interviews wurden analysiert. Klienten
beschrieben als kurzfristige Effekte der Heilbehandlungen positive
Körperempfindungen, mehr Entspannung und Wohlbefinden. Die längerfristig
wahrgenommenen Effekte standen im Zusammenhang mit signifikanten Veränderungen
des Lebens, neuen Deutungen, Ressourcenaktivierung und der Verbesserung sozialer 
Beziehungen durch die Klien­ten. Klienten mit Schmerzen beschrieben eine
Verringe­rung der Schmerzintensität. In den Fragebögen zeigten sich
Verbesserungen der Lebensqualität und der Selbstwirksamkeit, zu einem geringeren 
Ausmaß Verbesserungen der Beschwerdeintensität und des Kohärenzgefühls.
Schlussfolgerung: Die Ergebnisse dieser Pilotstudie könnten nützlich sein, um
Endpunkte für künftige pros­pektive Studien mit einem größeren Stichprobenumfang 
zu wählen: qualitative Analysen in Kombination mit Fragebögen, die globale und
umfassende Aspekte wie Lebensqualität, Selbstwirksamkeit und Intensität der
­Beschwerden erfassen, sind unserer Ansicht nach am besten geeignet.
© 2019 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000496736 
PMID: 30904903  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Aktuelle Urol. 2019 Apr;50(2):195-202. doi: 10.1055/a-0854-5049. Epub 2019 Mar
21.

[Physician health: What makes us ill? What keeps us healthy?]

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Braun J(1), Jocham D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Park-Klinik Manhagen, Innere Medizin, Großhansdorf.
(2)Coaching Prof. Jocham, Lübeck.

The medical profession is a particular health risk. Internal reasons for this are
the common practice of self-diagnosis and self-therapy, presenteeism (work
despite illness), and increased risks of addiction and suicide. External reasons 
include infectious diseases, violence against health professionals, the
increasingly difficult working conditions - due to economisation, among other
things - and the posttraumatic stress syndrome. Therefore, it is increasingly
important to proactively take care of one`s own health. Science has shown that
the underlying mechanisms leading to this problem are the high self-demand and
lack of self-care observed in medical professionals. These starting points and
available programs (cognitive-emotional reflection, stress management, relaxation
techniques, conflict resolution techniques, mindfulness, priming, framing,
meditation, embodiment, etc.) to strengthen resilience offer instruments to
optimise the salutogenesis of health professionals. This review article presents 
interdependencies and concepts aiming to strengthen the resilience of health
professionals.

Publisher: Der Arztberuf ist besonders gesundheitsgefährdend. Innere Gründe
hierfür sind verbreitete Selbstdiagnostik und Selbsttherapie, der Präsentismus
(Arbeiten trotz Krankheit), erhöhte Risiken für Suchterkrankungen und Suizid.
Äußere Gründe sind Infektionskrankheiten, Gewalt gegen Heilberufler, die u. a.
aufgrund der Ökonomisierung zunehmend schwierigen Arbeitsbedingungen und das
Posttraumatische Belastungssyndrom. Es wird daher zunehmend nötig, sich proaktiv 
um die eigene Gesundheit zu kümmern. Die wissenschaftliche Auseinandersetzung mit
der Problematik Arztgesundheit belegt als typische zugrunde liegende Mechanismen 
den häufig hohen Selbstanspruch und die mangelnde Selbstfürsorge von Ärzten und
Ärztinnen. U.a. diese Ansatzpunkte und verfügbare Programme (kognitiv-emotionale 
Reflektion, Stressmanagement, Entspannungs-Praktiken, Konfliktlösung,
Achtsamkeit, Priming, Framing, Meditation, Embodiment u. a.) zur Stärkung der
Resilienz Betroffener eröffnen Möglichkeiten für die Optimierung der Salutogenese
der im Gesundheitswesen Beschäftigten. Der Übersichtsartikel stellt die
Zusammenhänge und Konzepte für die Stärkung der Resilienz bei Heilberuflern dar.
© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-0854-5049 
PMID: 30897640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Die Autoren geben an, dass kein
Interessenkonflikt besteht.


149. Food Res Int. 2019 May;119:530-540. doi: 10.1016/j.foodres.2017.11.024. Epub 2017
Nov 21.

Biofilm formation by Salmonella sp. in the poultry industry: Detection, control
and eradication strategies.

Merino L(1), Procura F(2), Trejo FM(3), Bueno DJ(4), Golowczyc MA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET),
Argentina; Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en Criotecnología de Alimentos
(CIDCA), CCT La Plata - CONICET-UNLP, 47 y 116, La Plata, Argentina.
(2)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET),
Argentina; Instituto Nacional de Tecnología Agropecuaria EEA Concepción del
Uruguay, Ruta Provincial 39 Km 143,5, 3260 Concepción del Uruguay, Entre Ríos,
Argentina.
(3)Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en Criotecnología de Alimentos (CIDCA),
CCT La Plata - CONICET-UNLP, 47 y 116, La Plata, Argentina.
(4)Instituto Nacional de Tecnología Agropecuaria EEA Concepción del Uruguay, Ruta
Provincial 39 Km 143,5, 3260 Concepción del Uruguay, Entre Ríos, Argentina.
(5)Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en Criotecnología de Alimentos (CIDCA),
CCT La Plata - CONICET-UNLP, 47 y 116, La Plata, Argentina. Electronic address:
marinagolowczyc@biol.unlp.edu.ar.

Salmonella represents an important global public health problem and it is an
emerging zoonotic bacterial threat in the poultry industry. Diverse registered
human cases of salmonellosis shown poultry origins. Various control measures have
been employed both at the farming and processing levels to address it. This
review focuses on traditional and new detection techniques of biofilm formation
by Salmonella spp. and different approaches that can be used to prevent and/or
control biofilm formation by these bacteria. A number of methodologies based on
different approximations have been recently employed to detect and evaluate
bacteria attached to surfaces, including real-time polymerase chain reaction
(PCR), confocal laser scanning microscopy and Optical Coherence Tomography. Due
to persistence of Salmonella biofilm in food processing environments after
cleaning and sanitation, control and eradication strategies in poultry industry
should be constantly studied. In this sense, the use of several alternatives to
control Salmonella biofilm formation, such as lactic acid bacteria, phagetherapy,
extracts from aromatic plants, quorum sensing inhibitors, bacteriocins and
nanomaterials, have been successfully tested and will be reviewed.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodres.2017.11.024 
PMID: 30884686  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Brain Behav. 2019 Apr;9(4):e01259. doi: 10.1002/brb3.1259. Epub 2019 Mar 18.

Impairment and restrictions in possibly benign multiple sclerosis.

Schaefer LM(1)(2), Poettgen J(1)(2), Fischer A(1)(3), Gold S(1)(4), Stellmann
JP(1)(2), Heesen C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroimmunology and Multiple Sclerosis, University Medical Centre
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurology, University Medical Centre Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany.
(3)University of Central Lancashire, Preston, UK.
(4)Klinik für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: The aim was to describe a broad range of health dimensions in possibly
benign multiple sclerosis (MS) hypothesizing that despite some limitations there 
is a high adaptation to the disease.
METHODS: All patients from an outpatient university clinic data registry with an 
Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) ≤3.5 and disease duration ≥15 years were 
addressed in a cross-sectional study. Physical impairment, neuropsychological
functioning but also influence on activities and patient reported outcome
measures including coping were studied.
RESULTS: One hundred and twenty-five patients could be included (mean EDSS: 2.8; 
mean disease duration: 24 years). Cognitive impairment was minor (8%) but fatigue
(73%) and depression (46%) were prevalent. Nevertheless, QOL and daily activities
seemed to be less affected. Patients showed high social support, coping
abilities, and sense of coherence, which was predictive for their perceived
benignity of the disease. Based on the EDSS alone, we estimated the rate of
benign MS after 15 years of MS as high as 23% decreasing to 16% if cognition was 
included in the definition. However, cognitive performance was not relevantly
associated with other outcomes.
CONCLUSION: Common benign MS definitions seem to simplify a complex disease
picture where different impairments and personal resources lead to more or less
impact on people's lives.

© 2019 The Authors. Brain and Behavior published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.1259 
PMCID: PMC6456783
PMID: 30884218  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Hepatobiliary Surg Nutr. 2019 Feb;8(1):1-9. doi: 10.21037/hbsn.2018.11.10.

Health-related quality of life of living liver donors 1 year after donation.

Weng LC(1)(2), Huang HL(3), Lee WC(2), Tsai YH(1)(4), Wang WS(1), Chen KH(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan,
Taiwan.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Transplantation Center, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital Linkou, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Long-Term Care, College of Health Technology, National Taipei
University of Nursing and Health Science, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital Linkou,
Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Nursing, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital Linkou, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

Comment in
    Hepatobiliary Surg Nutr. 2021 Jun;10(3):394-396.

Background: Improving the health-related quality of life (HRQOL) of living liver 
donors post-donation is an important aspect of care quality. Analyzing the HRQOL 
of living liver donors prospectively could help improve our understanding of the 
recovery of HRQOL and help improve the quality of donor care. In this study, we
examined the HRQOL of living liver donors at pre-donation and at 1-year
post-donation and analyzed the effect of pre- and post-donation factors on the
donors' physical and mental HRQOL.
Methods: This was a prospective study. During the enrollment period (August 2013 
to December 2015), 68 living liver donors completed the study questionnaires 5
times: at pre-donation and at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months post-donation. The Medical
Outcomes Study Questionnaire Short Form-36, which yields both physical (PCS) and 
mental (MCS) component summary scores, was used to measure the HRQOL. The pre-
and post-donation factors included donation ambivalence, recipients' physical
condition, post-donation complications, and recipients' survival status.
Results: Participants' mean PCS scores were 43.59 and 56.50 at 1 and 12 months
after donation, respectively, whereas their mean MCS scores were 46.89 and 46.28,
respectively. The mean PCS score was worse at 1 month after donation but improved
significantly over time (P<0.05); conversely, the MCS was quite stable over time 
(P>0.05). A good PCS score was associated with no surgical complications of
donation (coefficient =2.87, P=0.02), whereas a poor MCS score was associated
with an education of less than a bachelor's degree (coefficient =-3.60, P=0.004),
a higher Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score in the recipient
(coefficient =-0.13, P=0.03), and recipient death (coefficient =-3.48, P=0.03).
Pre-donation ambivalence and sense of coherence were not significant predictors
of the PCS or MCS scores.
Conclusions: The impact of living liver donation on HRQOL was strongest in the
early stages of the post-surgery period for the physical domain. Health-care
professionals should carefully manage and monitor the progress of surgical
outcomes, particularly in high-risk groups such as donors with a low education
level or donors whose recipients have severe illness or end up dying after the
surgery. Doing so may allow for suitable intervention opportunities to improve
the HRQOL of living liver donors.

DOI: 10.21037/hbsn.2018.11.10 
PMCID: PMC6383025
PMID: 30881960 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no
conflicts of interest to declare.


152. J Altern Complement Med. 2019 Mar;25(S1):S21-S51. doi: 10.1089/acm.2018.0499.

Whole Systems Research Methods in Health Care: A Scoping Review.

Ijaz N(1), Rioux J(2), Elder C(3), Weeks J(4).

Author information: 
(1)1 Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(2)2 Integral Ayurveda and Yoga Therapy, Chapel Hill, NC.
(3)3 Kaiser Permanente Center for Health Research, Portland, OR.
(4)4 johnweeks-integrator.com, Editor-in-Chief, JACM, Seattle, WA.

OBJECTIVES: This scoping review evaluates two decades of methodological advances 
made by "whole systems research" (WSR) pioneers in the fields of traditional,
complementary, and integrative medicine (TCIM). Rooted in critiques of the
classical randomized controlled trial (RCT)'s suitability for evaluating
holistic, complex TCIM interventions, WSR centralizes the principle of "model
validity," representing a "fit" between research design and therapeutic paradigm.
DESIGN: In consultation with field experts, 41 clinical research exemplars were
selected for review from across 13 TCIM disciplines, with the aim of mapping the 
range and methodological characteristics of WSR studies. Using an analytic
charting approach, these studies' primary and secondary features are
characterized with reference to three focal areas: research method, intervention 
design, and outcome assessment.
RESULTS: The reviewed WSR exemplars investigate a wide range of multimodal and
multicomponent TCIM interventions, typified by wellness-geared, multitarget, and 
multimorbid therapeutic aims. Most studies include a behavioral focus, at times
in multidisciplinary or team-based contexts. Treatments are variously
individualized, often with reference to "dual" (biomedical and paradigm-specific)
diagnoses. Prospective and retrospective study designs substantially reflect
established biomedical research methods. Pragmatic, randomized, open label
comparative effectiveness designs with "usual care" comparators are most widely
used, at times with factorial treatment arms. Only two studies adopt a
double-blind, placebo-controlled RCT format. Some cohort-based controlled trials 
engage nonrandomized allocation strategies (e.g., matched controls,
preference-based assignment, and minimization); other key designs include
single-cohort pre-post studies, modified n-of-1 series, case series, case report,
and ethnography. Mixed methods designs (i.e., qualitative research and economic
evaluations) are evident in about one-third of exemplars. Primary and secondary
outcomes are predominantly assessed, at multiple intervals, through
patient-reported measures for symptom severity, quality of life/wellness, and/or 
treatment satisfaction; some studies concurrently evaluate objective outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Aligned with trends emphasizing "fit-for-purpose" research designs
to study the "real-world" effectiveness of complex, personalized clinical
interventions, WSR has emerged as a maturing scholarly discipline. The field is
distinguished by its patient-centered salutogenic focus and engagement with
nonbiomedical diagnostic and treatment frameworks. The rigorous pursuit of model 
validity may be further advanced by emphasizing complex analytic models,
paradigm-specific outcome assessment, inter-rater reliability, and
ethnographically informed designs. Policy makers and funders seeking to support
best practices in TCIM research may refer to this review as a key resource.

DOI: 10.1089/acm.2018.0499 
PMCID: PMC6447996
PMID: 30870019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Health Soc Care Community. 2019 Jul;27(4):e298-e312. doi: 10.1111/hsc.12733. Epub
2019 Mar 13.

Implementation of the Identification and Referral to Improve Safety programme for
patients with experience of domestic violence and abuse: A theory-based
mixed-method process evaluation.

Lewis NV(1)(2), Dowrick A(1), Sohal A(1), Feder G(2), Griffiths C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Primary Care and Public Health, Queen Mary University of London,
London, UK.
(2)Centre for Academic Primary Care, Bristol Medical School, University of
Bristol, Bristol, UK.

Identification and Referral to Improve Safety (IRIS) is a training and support
programme to improve the response to domestic violence and abuse (DVA) in general
practice. Following a pragmatic cluster-randomised trial, IRIS has been
implemented in over 30 administrative localities in the UK. The trial and local
evaluations of the IRIS implementation showed an increase in referrals from
general practice to third sector DVA services with a variation in the referral
rates within and across practices. Using Normalisation Process Theory (NPT), we
aimed to understand the reasons for such variability by identifying factors that 
influenced the implementation of IRIS in the National Health Service (NHS). We
conducted a mixed-method process evaluation which included: (a) a case study
(100 hr of participant observation, 19 interviews); (b) a survey (n = 118); (c)
qualitative analysis of free-text comments from the survey; (d) qualitative
interviews (n = 8); (e) document review (n = 44). Data were collected from NHS
and third sector staff across five London boroughs from August 2015 to December
2017, analysed descriptively and thematically and triangulated using the NPT
constructs coherence, cognitive participation, collection action and reflexive
monitoring. The survey showed wide variation in the extent to which practice
staff saw IRIS as a normal part of their daily work. Qualitative data and
documents illuminated drivers of DVA work, implementation barriers and suggested 
solutions. The drivers were related to individual professional's characteristics 
and relationships. The barriers were linked to the differing sense-making and
legitimisation of DVA work and differing contexts between the NHS and third
sector. Solutions were adaptations to IRIS relative to these contextual
differences. The suggested solutions can be used to update IRIS commissioning
guidance, training for trainers and training for general practice. The updates
should reflect the importance of ongoing support of IRIS from practice leads and 
commissioners, extended funding periods for IRIS and continuity of the IRIS team.

© 2019 The Authors. Health and Social Care in the Community Published by John
Wiley & Sond Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/hsc.12733 
PMCID: PMC6617800
PMID: 30868711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2019 Mar 11;17(1):44. doi: 10.1186/s12955-019-1114-0.

Sense of coherence in family caregivers of people living with dementia: a
mixed-methods psychometric evaluation.

Stansfeld J(1)(2), Orrell M(3), Vernooij-Dassen M(4), Wenborn J(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Psychiatry, University College London, Maple House, 149 Tottenham 
Court Road, London, W1T 7BN, UK. j.stansfeld@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Research and Development, North East London NHS Foundation Trust, Goodmayes
Hospital, Ilford, IG3 8XJ, UK. j.stansfeld@ucl.ac.uk.
(3)Institute of Mental Health, University of Nottingham, Triumph Road,
Nottingham, NG7 2TU, UK.
(4)Radboud University Medical Centre, Postbus 9101, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.
(5)Division of Psychiatry, University College London, Maple House, 149 Tottenham 
Court Road, London, W1T 7BN, UK.
(6)Research and Development, North East London NHS Foundation Trust, Goodmayes
Hospital, Ilford, IG3 8XJ, UK.

BACKGROUND: Family caregivers of people living with dementia can experience
feelings of burden and stress but the concept of sense of coherence has been
identified as an important protective trait against the negative impact of
caregiving. Despite this, there has been no psychometric evaluation of the Sense 
of Coherence scale-13 with this population. Therefore, a psychometric evaluation 
was conducted using a mixed-methods approach.
METHOD: Five hundred and eighty-three caregivers of people living with dementia
participated in the study. We examined the feasibility, internal consistency,
construct validity, floor and ceiling effects, concurrent validity and face
validity of the Sense of Coherence scale-13.
RESULTS: The Sense of Coherence scale-13 demonstrated adequate internal
consistency. Sense of coherence was positively related to resilience, sense of
competence and health related quality of life, demonstrating good concurrent
validity. However, the face validity of the scale was assessed as poor.
CONCLUSION: The sense of coherence scale performed well under psychometric
evaluation however guidance for caregivers should be examined and revised to
reflect feedback from caregivers who completed this study, which could lead to
improved face validity for this scale.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ISRCTN10748953 . Registered 18th September 2014.

DOI: 10.1186/s12955-019-1114-0 
PMCID: PMC6417216
PMID: 30866961  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


155. BMC Psychiatry. 2019 Mar 11;19(1):89. doi: 10.1186/s12888-019-2065-z.

Sense of coherence is linked to post-traumatic growth after critical incidents in
Austrian ambulance personnel.

Ragger K(1)(2), Hiebler-Ragger M(1)(2), Herzog G(1), Kapfhammer HP(1),
Unterrainer HF(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)University Clinic of Psychiatry and Psychotherapeutic Medicine, Medical
University of Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 31, A-8036, Graz, Austria.
(2)Center for Integrative Addiction Research (Grüner Kreis Society), Rudolfsplatz
9, A-1010, Vienna, Austria.
(3)University Clinic of Psychiatry and Psychotherapeutic Medicine, Medical
University of Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 31, A-8036, Graz, Austria.
human.unterrainer@univie.ac.at.
(4)Center for Integrative Addiction Research (Grüner Kreis Society), Rudolfsplatz
9, A-1010, Vienna, Austria. human.unterrainer@univie.ac.at.
(5)Department for Religious Studies, University of Vienna, Schenkenstraße
8-10/5th floor, A-1010, Vienna, Austria. human.unterrainer@univie.ac.at.

BACKGROUND: Ambulance personnel, as well as other emergency services like
fire-fighters or the police force, are regularly confronted with experiences of
extreme psychological distress and potentially traumatizing events in the line of
their daily duties. As a consequence, this occupational group is exposed to an
elevated risk of developing symptoms of Post-Traumatic Stress (PTSS).
Subsequently, symptoms of Post-Traumatic Stress have been observed as potentially
co-occurring with Post-Traumatic Growth (PTG) in ambulance personnel as well.
Therefore, in this study we hypothesized that Sense of Coherence (SOC) might play
an important role as an underlying feature in enabling growth after stressful
experiences in Austrian ambulance personnel.
METHODS: In this study, voluntary and full-time ambulance personnel (n = 266) of 
the Austrian Red Cross ambulance service completed an online survey including the
Sense of Coherence Scale (SOC-29), the Post-Traumatic Growth Inventory (PTGI) and
the Impact of Event Scale Revised (IES-R) for the assessment of PTSS. In line
with theoretical considerations, a two-step cluster analysis limited to four
clusters and further ANOVAs were conducted.
RESULTS: Four clusters were confirmed and labelled PTSS-low/PTG-low,
PTSS-low/PTG-high, PTSS-high/PTG-high and PTSS-high/PTG-low. Further ANOVAs
revealed substantial cluster differences in SOC, with higher SOC-levels in
PTSS-high/PTG-high than in PTSS-high/PTG-low (p < .01), in PTSS-low/PTG-high than
in PTSS-low/PTG-low (p < .01) and in PTSS-low/PTG-high than in PTSS-high/PTG-low 
(p < .01).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings point to a significant association between SOC and the 
development of PTG in ambulance personnel. Furthermore, the results suggest that 
growth and stress after critical incidents are independent from each other and
can co-exist. Therefore, promoting SOC (e.g., meaningfulness) in ambulance
personnel - e.g., through psychological interventions - might preserve and
enhance psychological health after critical incidents.

DOI: 10.1186/s12888-019-2065-z 
PMCID: PMC6417083
PMID: 30866860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Scand J Caring Sci. 2019 Dec;33(4):801-814. doi: 10.1111/scs.12676. Epub 2019 Mar
13.

Development and psychometric properties of the Joy-of-Life Scale in cognitively
intact nursing home patients.

Haugan G(1), Rinnan E(1)(2)(3), Espnes GA(1)(2), Drageset J(4)(5), Rannestad
T(1)(2), André B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)NTNU Center for health promotion research, Trondheim, Norway.
(2)NTNU Department of public health and nursing, Trondheim, Norway.
(3)Trondheim municipality, Bergen, Norway.
(4)University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(5)Western University of Applied Sciences, Bergen, Norway.

AIM: To develop and psychometrically test the Joy-of-Life Scale. The research
question addressed evidence related to the dimensionality, reliability and
construct validity, all of which considered inter-related measurement properties.
METHODS: Cross-sectional data were collected during 2017-2018, in 27 nursing
homes representing four different Norwegian municipalities, located in Western
and Mid-Norway. The total sample comprised 188 of 204 (92% response rate)
long-term nursing home patients who met the inclusion criteria: (i) local
authority's decision of long-term nursing home care; (ii) residential time
3 months or longer; (iii) informed consent competency recognised by responsible
doctor and nurse; and (iv) capable of being interviewed.
RESULTS: Exploratory and confirmative factor analyses clearly suggested a
unidimensional solution. Five of the original 18 items showed low reliability and
validity; excluding these items revealed an acceptable model fit for the
one-dimensional 13-item measurement model. Reliability and construct validity
were acceptable, indicating good internal consistency.
CONCLUSION: Significant factor loadings, several goodness-of-fit indices and
significant correlations in the expected directions with the selected constructs 
(anxiety, depression, self-transcendence, meaning-in-life, sense of coherence,
nurse-patient interaction and quality of life) supported the psychometric
properties of the Joy-of-Life Scale.
IMPACT: The 'Joy-of-Life-Nursing-Home' is a national strategy for promoting
quality of life, meaning and quality of life among nursing home patients in
Norway. Therefore, exploring the essence of the Joy-of-Life phenomenon and
developing a measurement scale assessing joy-of-life in this population is
important for the further development of care quality in nursing homes.

© 2019 Nordic College of Caring Science.

DOI: 10.1111/scs.12676 
PMID: 30866075  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Gastrointestin Liver Dis. 2019 Mar;28(1):29-32. doi:
10.15403/jgld.2014.1121.281.coh.

Sense of coherence in people with and without inflammatory bowel diseases - is
there a difference?

Naftali T(1), Eindor-Abarbanel A(2), Ruhimovich N(1), Bar-Gil Shitrit A(3),
Sklerovsky-Benjaminov F(1), Laish I(1), Matalon S(4), Shirin H(4), Milgrom Y(3), 
Ziv-Baran T(5), Broide E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Meir Medical Center, affiliated
with the Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)The Kamila Gonczarowski Institute for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases,
Assaf Harofeh Medical Center, affiliated with the Sackler School of Medicine, Tel
Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. adiabarbanel@gmail.com.
(3)Digestive Diseases Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)The Kamila Gonczarowski Institute for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases,
Assaf Harofeh Medical Center, affiliated with the Sackler School of Medicine, Tel
Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(5)Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, School of Public Health,
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Sense of coherence (SOC) is a theoretical concept reflecting
a person's resources and orientation, which enable individuals to cope with
stressors in a health-promoting manner. In several multifactorial chronic
diseases, such as diabetes mellitus and systemic lupus erythematosus, SOC was
correlated with disease development. It was also related with the emotional
distress in patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).The aim of this study 
was to investigate the possible correlation between low SOC scores and the
presence of IBD.
METHODS: A total of 183 Crohn's disease (CD) and 71 ulcerative colitis (UC)
patients completed questionnaires including demographic data and the 13 items for
the SOC questionnaire. The IBD patients were matched to 124 healthy people
according to age, gender, education, employment status and marital status.
RESULTS: In the CD cohort, 96 patients were matched to the healthy cohort
according to the propensity score value, and in the UC cohort 57 were matched.
Patients with Crohns' disease had a median SOC score of 63 (IQR 56-71), and
healthy matching controls of 62.5 (IQR 55.25- 68.75) p=0.369. Patients with
ulcerative patients had a median SOC score of 66 (IQR 56-73) and healthy controls
62 (IQR 55-69) p=0.354.
CONCLUSIONS: In our study SOC was not related to the development of IBD. The
question of whether SOC is associated with the development of chronic disease and
particularly with IBD remains open.

DOI: 10.15403/jgld.2014.1121.281.coh 
PMID: 30851169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Eur J Cancer Care (Engl). 2019 Jul;28(4):e13030. doi: 10.1111/ecc.13030. Epub
2019 Mar 7.

"A limited focus on cancer rehabilitation"-A qualitative study of the experiences
from Norwegian Cancer Coordinators in Primary Health Care.

Lie NK(1), Solvang PK(1), Hauken MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiotherapy, Faculty of Health Sciences, Oslo Metropolitan
University, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Center for Crisis Psychology, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

OBJECTIVE: The facilitation of complex cancer rehabilitation interventions in
primary health care has become of growing importance to meet the
bio-psycho-social needs of cancer survivors. However, the delivery of cancer
rehabilitation is debated and services are underutilised. Cancer coordinators
(CCs) provide patients with coordinated services throughout the trajectory.
Little is known about CCs' rehabilitation-focused tasks. This study's objective
was to explore Norwegian CCs' experiences with cancer rehabilitation
interventions in primary health care.
METHODS: Data were obtained via two focus group interviews with 12 participants, 
analysed using thematic analysis and discussed using Salutogenesis, a theory for 
health promotion.
RESULTS: The analysis revealed three themes: (a) "A missing link" to cancer
rehabilitation in primary health care, (b) Aiming to put cancer rehabilitation
"in the spotlight," (c) The need to build a system for rehabilitation service
delivery.
CONCLUSION: CCs experience a lacking focus on and missing systems for cancer
rehabilitation in primary health care. CCs aim to improve local practices by
advocating patients' needs and educating professionals. CCs must be supported via
education and training in system-level work, an increased policy focus and
resources for cancer rehabilitation. More research is required into how CCs may
facilitate cancer rehabilitation in primary health care.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ecc.13030 
PMID: 30848034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Community Ment Health J. 2019 Jul;55(5):894-905. doi: 10.1007/s10597-019-00392-x.
Epub 2019 Mar 6.

Between the Inside and the Outside World: Coping of Ultra-Orthodox Individuals
with Their Work Environment After Academic Studies.

Braun-Lewensohn O(1), Kalagy T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Conflict Management & Resolution Program, Department of Interdisciplinary
Studies, Ben Gurion University, POB 653, Beer Sheva, Israel. ornabl@bgu.ac.il.
(2)Conflict Management & Resolution Program, Department of Interdisciplinary
Studies, Ben Gurion University, POB 653, Beer Sheva, Israel.

This study has explored how ultra-Orthodox individuals cope when facing secular
norms and values in their work environment. The study was conducted in Israel,
where 614 ultra-Orthodox adults answered questions regarding demographic
characteristics, identities, openness to the workplace, social environment, Brief
Cope, community sense of coherence (CSOC) and Employee Satisfaction Inventory.
Individuals in the main sectors of the ultra-Orthodox society reported higher
CSOC and stronger religiosity while individuals from the minor sectors reported
greater openness to the job's social environment. Demographics, coping strategies
and CSOC were significant in explaining job satisfaction. The results will be
discussed based on stress and coping theories and on the salutogenic theory.

DOI: 10.1007/s10597-019-00392-x 
PMID: 30843121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019 Mar 5;16(5). pii: E804. doi:
10.3390/ijerph16050804.

Analysis of the Differential Relationship between the Perception of One's Life
and Coping Resources among Three Generations of Bedouin Women.

Braun-Lewensohn O(1), Abu-Kaf S(2), Al-Said K(3)(4), Huss E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Conflict Management and Resolution Program, Department of Interdisciplinary
Studies, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba 8410501, Israel.
ornabl@bgu.ac.il.
(2)Conflict Management and Resolution Program, Department of Interdisciplinary
Studies, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba 8410501, Israel.
aks@bgu.ac.il.
(3)Conflict Management and Resolution Program, Department of Interdisciplinary
Studies, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba 8410501, Israel.
haled70@gmail.com.
(4)Kay Academic College of Education, Beersheba 84536, Israel. haled70@gmail.com.
(5)Social Work Department, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba 8410501,
Israel. ehuss@bgu.ac.il.

Bedouin society has undergone rapid changes over the past decade. The younger
generation of Bedouin women is better educated, which has enabled them to enter
different professions, increased their incomes and elevated their social status. 
We examined the sense of coherence (SOC) and its components of meaningfulness,
manageability and comprehensibility as well as the use of coping strategies among
Bedouin women from three age groups. We also investigated the coping resources
and strategies before determining the relationships between these variables in
the three groups. One hundred ninety-six women participated in the study.
Differences were found mostly between the oldest age group (61 years and older)
and the two younger groups (21⁻40 and 41⁻60 years old). The oldest women reported
less meaningfulness and used less positive reframing, planning, humor and
acceptance. In terms of coping strategies, venting was used more by the youngest 
group whereas behavioral disengagement was used more by the oldest group. In the 
younger groups, SOC and its components were positively correlated with the use of
coping strategies that are considered to be adaptive and with emotional support. 
However, the correlations between these factors were negative among the oldest
group, which points to non-adaptive coping strategies used by these women. These 
results are discussed in light of the salutogenic, stress-appraisal and coping
theories.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph16050804 
PMCID: PMC6427352
PMID: 30841587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


161. BMC Geriatr. 2019 Mar 5;19(1):72. doi: 10.1186/s12877-019-1071-9.

CareACT - internet-based intervention for enhancing the psychological well-being 
of elderly caregivers - a study protocol of a controlled trial.

Lappalainen P(1)(2), Pakkala I(3), Nikander R(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)The GeroCenter Foundation for Aging Research and Development, Jyväskylä,
Finland. paivi.k.lappalainen@jyu.fi.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland.
paivi.k.lappalainen@jyu.fi.
(3)The GeroCenter Foundation for Aging Research and Development, Jyväskylä,
Finland.
(4)Department of Research & Education, Central Hospital of Central Finland,
Jyväskylä, Finland.
(5)Faculty of Sport Sciences, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland.

BACKGROUND: The rapid increase in the number of elderly family caregivers
underlines the need for new support systems. Internet-delivered psychological
interventions are a potential approach, as they are easy to access for family
caregivers who are often homebound with their care recipient. This study examines
the relative effectiveness of an internet-based acceptance and commitment therapy
(ACT) intervention or a standardized institutional rehabilitation program, first,
in reducing depressive symptoms, and second, in improving the well-being and
quality of life of elderly family caregivers compared to a control group
receiving support from voluntary family caregiver associations.
METHODS: 156 family caregivers aged 60 or more are studied in a
quasi-experimental study design that compares three groups of family caregivers
(Group 1; n = 65: a guided 12-week web-based intervention; Group 2, n = 52: a
standardized institutional rehabilitation program in a rehabilitation center;
Group 3, n = 39: support provided by voluntary caregiver associations). Data
collection is performed at three time-points: pre-measurement and at 4 months and
10 months thereafter. Caregivers' depressive symptoms as a primary outcome, and
perceived burden, anxiety, quality of life, sense of coherence, psychological
flexibility, thought suppression, and personality as secondary outcomes are
measured using validated self-report questionnaires. Physical performance and
user experiences are also investigated. Between-group differences in the effects 
of the interventions are examined using multiple-group modeling techniques, and
effect-size calculations.
DISCUSSION: The study will compare the effectiveness of a novel web-based program
in reducing depressive symptoms and improving the psychological well-being of
elderly family caregivers, or a standardized institutional rehabilitation program
representing usual care and a control group receiving support offered by
voluntary caregiver associations. The results will expand the knowledge base of
clinicians and provide evidence on effective strategies to improve the mental
health and overall quality of life of elderly family caregivers.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: The study was retrospectively registered in
www.clinicaltrials.gov (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03391596 on January 4, 
2018.

DOI: 10.1186/s12877-019-1071-9 
PMCID: PMC6402103
PMID: 30836951  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Psychiatry Res. 2019 Feb;272:774-783. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2018.12.082. Epub
2018 Dec 18.

Effectiveness of psychoanalysis and long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy on
personality and social functioning 10 years after start of treatment.

Lindfors O(1), Knekt P(2), Lehtonen J(3), Virtala E(4), Maljanen T(5), Härkänen
T(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Health and Welfare, P. O. Box 30, 00271, Helsinki,
Finland; University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. Electronic address:
olavi.lindfors@thl.fi.
(2)National Institute for Health and Welfare, P. O. Box 30, 00271, Helsinki,
Finland; Biomedicum Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)National Institute for Health and Welfare, P. O. Box 30, 00271, Helsinki,
Finland; University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.
(4)National Institute for Health and Welfare, P. O. Box 30, 00271, Helsinki,
Finland.
(5)The Social Insurance Institution, Helsinki, Finland; National Institute for
Health and Welfare, P. O. Box 30, 00271, Helsinki, Finland.

The evidence on potentially greater benefits of psychoanalysis (PA) vs. long-term
psychodynamic psychotherapy (LPP) is scarce. This study compared the
effectiveness of PA and LPP on personality and social functioning during a
10-year follow-up from the beginning of the treatments. The eligible patients, 41
self-selected for PA and 128 assigned to LPP, were 20-45 years of age and had
anxiety or mood disorder. Outcomes were analyzed using ten standard measures of
personality and social functioning, carried out 5-9 times during the follow-up.
Different change patterns by time in PA and LPP emerged, suggesting less benefit 
of PA during the first years of follow-up and more benefit in most outcomes
thereafter. Greater post-treatment improvement in PA than in LPP was seen up to
1-2 years after PA had ended in more mature defense style (DSQ), level of
personality organization (LPO), more positive self-concept (SASB), more improved 
social adjustment (SAS-SR) and sense of coherence (SOC). However, at the 10-year 
follow-up the differences were non-significant. In conclusion, PA may give some
additional benefits when long-term aims are linked to personality and social
functioning. The relatively small differences and higher costs in comparison to
LPP may restrict the feasibility of PA.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2018.12.082 
PMID: 30832198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2019 Jul;35(5):e3147. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.3147. Epub 2019
Mar 25.

Association of oxidative stress and inflammatory markers with chronic stress in
patients with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes.

Siddiqui A(1), Desai NG(2), Sharma SB(3), Aslam M(1), Sinha UK(4), Madhu SV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of
Endocrinology, University College of Medical Sciences, University of Delhi,
Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Institute of Human Behaviour and Allied Sciences,
Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University College of Medical Sciences,
University of Delhi, Delhi, India.
(4)Department of Clinical Psychology, Institute of Human Behaviour and Allied
Sciences, Delhi, India.

AIMS: Chronic stress is associated with increased risk of type 2 diabetes.
Oxidative stress and inflammation are potential mediators of this risk. This
study was conducted to investigate the association of oxidative stress and
inflammatory markers with chronic stress and newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: Oxidative stress/antioxidant status (malondialdehyde [MDA], reduce
glutathione [GSH], glutathione reductase [GR], glutathione peroxidase [GPx],
catalase [CAT], superoxide dismutase [SOD]), inflammatory markers (highly
sensitive C-reactive protein [hsCRP], adiponectin, leptin), chronic stress levels
as assessed by stress scales-presumptive stressful life events scale (PSLES),
perceived stress scale (PSS), sense of coherence (SOC) and stress
biomarker-salivary cortisol in 125 subjects with newly detected diabetes mellitus
(NDDM) were compared with an equal number of age and sex matched subjects with
normal glucose tolerance (NGT).
RESULTS: NDDM subjects as compared with NGT had significantly increased MDA
(P < 0.001), hsCRP (P < 0.001), and leptin (P = 0.014) levels and increased GR
(P = 0.043) and SOD (P < 0.001) activity along with decreased GSH (P < 0.001) and
adiponectin (P < 0.001) levels. They also had significantly higher PSLES-LT and
PSS and lower SOC scores along with elevated levels of 10:00 pm salivary cortisol
and post dexamethasone salivary cortisol as compared with NGT. In stepwise
logistic regression analysis, variables GSH (OR: 0.805), SOD (OR: 1.004), and
adiponectin (OR: 0.771) along with PSLES-LT (OR: 1.007), PSS (OR: 1.147), SOC
(OR: 0.667), salivary cortisol 10:00 pm (OR: 1.382), WC (OR: 1.087), and HOMA-IR 
(OR: 2.721) emerged as significant predictors of NDDM.
CONCLUSION: The findings of this study indicate that chronic psychological stress
and stress responses are associated significantly with inflammation and oxidative
stress, which could act as mediating stress related risk factors for type 2
diabetes.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/dmrr.3147 
PMID: 30801898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Front Sociol. 2019 Feb 26;4:9. doi: 10.3389/fsoc.2019.00009. eCollection 2019.

Creating a Culture of Health in Planning and Implementing Innovative Strategies
Addressing Non-communicable Chronic Diseases.

Tziraki-Segal C(1)(2), De Luca V(3), Santana S(4), Romano R(3), Tramontano G(3), 
Scattola P(5), Celata C(6), Gelmi G(5), Ponce Márquez S(7), Lopez-Samaniego L(8),
Zavagli V(9), Halkoaho A(10), Grimes C(11), Tomás MT(12), Fernandes B(12), Calzà 
L(13), Speranza P(14), Coppola L(6), Jager-Wittenaar H(15), O'Caoimh R(16),
Pietilä AM(17), Carriazo AM(18), Apostolo J(19), Iaccarino G(20), Liotta G(21),
Tramontano D(22), Molloy W(23), Triassi M(24), Viggiani V(25), Illario M(26).

Author information: 
(1)Israel Gerontological Data Center, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(2)MELABEV- Community Clubs for Elders, Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)Research and Development Unit, Federico II University Hospital, Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Economics, Management, Industrial Engineering and Tourism,
Institute of Electronics and Informatics Engineering of Aveiro, University of
Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal.
(5)Health Protection Agency of the Metropolitan City of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(6)Health Promotion, Screening and Prevention Unit, Milan, Italy.
(7)International Research Projects Office (IRPO), Universidad de Deusto, Bilbao, 
Spain.
(8)Progress and Health Foundation, Regional Ministry of Health of Andalucía,
Seville, Spain.
(9)ANT Italia Foundation, Bologna, Italy.
(10)School of Health Care and Social Services Education and R&D, Tampere
University of Applied Sciences, Tampere, Finland.
(11)Public Health Agency of Northern Ireland, Belfast, United Kingdom.
(12)Health and Technology Research Center, Escola Superior de Tecnologia da Saúde
de Lisboa, Instituto Politécnico de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(13)Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Bologna, Bologna,
Italy.
(14)General Affairs Unit, Federico II University Hospital, Naples, Italy.
(15)Research Group Healthy Ageing, Allied Health Care and Nursing, Hanze
University of Applied Sciences, Groningen, Netherlands.
(16)Department of Medicine, Clinical Sciences Institute, National University of
Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
(17)Department of Nursing Science, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio,
Finland.
(18)Regional Ministry of Health of Andalucía, Seville, Spain.
(19)The Health Sciences Research Unit: Nursing, Nursing School of Coimbra,
Coimbra, Portugal.
(20)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry, University of Salerno,
Salerno, Italy.
(21)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Rome "Tor Vergata",
Rome, Italy.
(22)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, Federico II
University of Naples, Naples, Italy.
(23)Clinical Gerontology and Rehabilitation Centre, Gerontology and
Rehabilitation School of Medicine, University College of Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(24)Department of Public Health, Federico II University of Naples, Naples, Italy.
(25)Director General, Federico II University Hospital, Naples, Italy.
(26)Health Innovation Division, General Directorate for Health, Naples, Italy.

Ongoing demographic changes are challenging health systems worldwide especially
in relation to increasing longevity and the resultant rise of non-communicable
diseases (NCDs). To meet these challenges, a paradigm shift to a more proactive
approach to health promotion, and maintenance is needed. This new paradigm
focuses on creating and implementing an ecological model of Culture of Health.
The conceptualization of the Culture of Health is defined as one where good
health and well-being flourish across geographic, demographic, and social
sectors; fostering healthy equitable communities where citizens have the
opportunity to make choices and be co-producers of healthy lifestyles. Based on
Antonovsky's Salutogenesis model which asserts that the experience of health
moves along a continuum across the lifespan, we will identify the key drivers for
achieving a Culture of Health. These include mindset/expectations, sense of
community, and civic engagement. The present article discusses these drivers and 
identifies areas where policy and research actions are needed to advance positive
change on population health and well-being. We highlight empirical evidence of
drivers within the EU guided by the activities within the thematic Action Groups 
of the European Innovation Partnership on Active and Healthy Aging (EIP on AHA), 
focusing on Lifespan Health Promotion and Prevention of Age-Related Frailty and
Disease (A3 Action Group). We will specifically focus on the effect of Culture on
Health, highlighting cross-cutting drivers across domains such as innovations at 
the individual and community level, and in synergies with business, policy, and
research entities. We will present examples of drivers for creating a Culture of 
Health, the barriers, the remaining gaps, and areas of future research to achieve
an inclusive and sustainable asset-based community.

Copyright © 2019 Tziraki-Segal, De Luca, Santana, Romano, Tramontano, Scattola,
Celata, Gelmi, Ponce Márquez, Lopez-Samaniego, Zavagli, Halkoaho, Grimes, Tomás, 
Fernandes, Calzà, Speranza, Coppola, Jager-Wittenaar, O'Caoimh, Pietilä,
Carriazo, Apostolo, Iaccarino, Liotta, Tramontano, Molloy, Triassi, Viggiani and 
Illario.

DOI: 10.3389/fsoc.2019.00009 
PMCID: PMC8022497
PMID: 33869336 


165. Clin Ter. 2019 Jan-Feb;170(1):e4-e9. doi: 10.7417/CT.2019.2101.

A characteristic type of retinal microvascular abnormalities in a patient with
Neurofibromatosis type 1.

Moramarco A(1), Lambiase A(1), Mallone F(1), Miraglia E(2), Giustini S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organ of Sense, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

This study aims to describe a typical retinal microvascular abnormality in
patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF-1). A 64-year-old man with diagnosis
of NF-1 was evaluated by complete ophthalmological examination, including
fluorescein angiography and spectral Domain OCT in Near-Infrared (NIR-OCT)
modality. Slit lamp exam showed the presence of more than 10 Lisch nodules for
each eye. Ophthalmic examinations and NIR-OCT scans showed the presence of
retinal tortuous vessels ending in a 'puff of smoke' arrangement. The clinical
significance as diagnostic and prognostic factor of this novel type of retinal
microvascular abnormality in NF-1 should be further investigated.

DOI: 10.7417/CT.2019.2101 
PMID: 30789191  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2019 Mar;100(3):448-457. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2018.06.009. 
Epub 2018 Jul 4.

Sense of Coherence, Disability, and Health-Related Quality of Life: A
Cross-Sectional Study of Rehabilitation Patients in Norway.

Moen VP(1), Eide GE(2), Drageset J(3), Gjesdal S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Habilitation and Rehabilitation, Haukeland University Hospital,
Bergen, Norway; Department of Global Public Health and Primary Care, University
of Bergen, Bergeny, Norway. Electronic address: vegard.pihl.moen@helse-bergen.no.
(2)Department of Global Public Health and Primary Care, University of Bergen,
Bergeny, Norway; Centre for Clinical Research, Haukeland University Hospital,
Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Global Public Health and Primary Care, University of Bergen,
Bergeny, Norway.

OBJECTIVE: To study relations between sense of coherence (SOC), disability, and
mental and physical components of health-related quality of life (HRQOL) among
rehabilitation patients.
DESIGN: Survey.
SETTING: Rehabilitation centers in secondary care.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients (N=975) from the Western Norway Health Region consented to
participate and had valid data of the main outcome measures.
INTERVENTIONS: Not applicable.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: SOC was measured with the sense of coherence questionnaire
(13-item SOC scale [SOC-13]), disability with the World Health Organization
Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0 (WHODAS 2.0), and HRQOL with the Medical
Outcomes Study 36-Item Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36).
RESULTS: Mean scores ± SD were 62.9±12.3 for SOC-13, 30.8±16.2 for WHODAS 2.0,
32.8±9.6 for SF-36 physical component score, and 43.6±11.8 for SF-36 mental
component score. Linear regression analysis showed that increased SOC score was
associated with reduced disability scores in the following domains with estimated
regression coefficients (95% confidence interval) cognition -0.20 (-0.32 to
-0.08), getting along -0.36 (-0.52 to -0.25), and participation -0.23 (-0.36 to
-0.11). The fit of 2 structural models with the association from SOC to HRQOL and
disability or with disability as a mediator was better for the mental versus the 
physical component of HRQOL. High SOC increased the mental component of HRQOL,
consistent for all diagnostic groups. For both models, good fit was reported for 
circulatory and less good fit for musculoskeletal diseases.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that higher SOC decreases disability in mental 
domains. The effect of SOC on disability and HRQOL might vary between diagnostic 
groups. SOC could be a target in rehabilitation, especially among patients with
circulatory diseases, but prospective studies are needed.

Copyright © 2018 American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apmr.2018.06.009 
PMID: 30786976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Confl Health. 2019 Feb 6;13:3. doi: 10.1186/s13031-019-0185-1. eCollection 2019.

Construct validity and factor structure of sense of coherence (SoC-13) scale as a
measure of resilience in Eritrean refugees living in Ethiopia.

Getnet B(1)(2), Alem A(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Psychiatry, College of Health Sciences, Addis Ababa University,
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(2)2Department of Psychology, University of Gondar, P.O. Box 196, Gondar,
Ethiopia.
(3)Amanuel Hospital, P.O.Box 9086, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

Background: There is a scarcity of adapted measures to study resilience and
mental health of people in humanitarian settings in Africa. The aim of this study
was to identify the factor structure and other psychometric properties of the
Sense of Coherence (SoC-13) scale in Eritrean refugees living in Ethiopia.
Methods: In a cross-sectional survey, 562 adults were selected randomly from
Eritrean refugees living in Mai Aini camp, Ethiopia. The SoC-13, the Center for
Epidemiologic Studies Depression scale (CES-D), the Pre and Post-Migration Living
Difficulties checklist, the Primary Care Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder screener 
(PC-PTSD), the Oslo Social Support Scale (OSS-3), the Coping Style scale and the 
Fast Alcohol Screening Test (FAST) were administered concurrently. Confirmatory
Factor Analysis (CFA) was used to investigate the factor structure of the SoC-13 
using IBM SPSS Amos, version 21.
Result: A one factor model of the SoC with twelve items had the best fit to the
current data (CFA = 0.982, RMSEA = 0.035 [90%CI = 0.018, 0.050]), with good
internal consistency (Cronbach's Alpha = 0.75). When all 13 items of the Tigrigna
version were considered, there was an inverse association of SoC-13 with
PC-PTSD(r = - 0.433, p < 0.001), CES-D (r = - 0.597, p < 0.001), Pre and
post-migration living difficulties checklist (r = - 0.265, p < .001and
r = - 0.249, p < 0.001 respectively), and FAST (r = - 0.105, p < 0.001),
providing support for the divergent validity of the scale. The SoC-13 was
associated positively with the Oslo Social Support scale (OSS-3)(r = 0.363
p < 0.001) and task-oriented coping (r = 0.089, p < 0.001), demonstrating
convergent validity. The four items, specifically item-1, item-2, item-3 and
item-12 have shown relatively weaker item loadings (β<0.40); but item-2
demonstrated non-significant loading (β = 0.06, p>0.05) in a one factor model of 
SoC-13.
Conclusions: Although the 13-items of the Tigrigna version of the SoC scale
loaded significantly onto their respective factors in the three factor model,
only 12 items loaded significantly onto the one factor model, which demonstrated 
superior fit to the current data. Keeping in mind that future research should
examine the conceptualizations of the four items demonstrating poor convergent
validity in this Eritrean sample, the reduced Tigrigna version of SoC-12 is a
reasonable measure of sense of coherence in this community.

DOI: 10.1186/s13031-019-0185-1 
PMCID: PMC6366046
PMID: 30774708 

Conflict of interest statement: This study was conducted after obtaining an
ethical clearance from Institutional Ethical Review Board (IRB) of College of
Health Sciences in Addis Ababa University (AAU) under approval letter (protocol
number: 052/14/Psy). Participants were provided with information sheet about the 
study regarding its objective, relevance, beneficence, risk, participant’s rights
and others. Then a written consent from each participant was obtained before
engaging them to participate. Ethical issues as outlined by declaration of
Helsinki for human participants in medical research were adhered.Not
Applicable.Authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.Springer Nature 
remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.


168. Midwifery. 2019 May;72:30-38. doi: 10.1016/j.midw.2019.02.004. Epub 2019 Feb 7.

Migrant Polish women overcoming communication challenges in Scottish maternity
services: A qualitative descriptive study.

Crowther S(1), Lau A(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing and Midwifery, Robert Gordon University, Garthdee Road,
Aberdeen AB10 7AQ, UK. Electronic address: s.a.crowther@rgu.ac.uk.
(2)School of Nursing and Midwifery, Robert Gordon University, Garthdee Road,
Aberdeen AB10 7AQ, UK.

BACKGROUND: Migrant women are more likely to experience sub-optimal maternity
outcomes and are often described in a problematised way. Communication is crucial
in maternity and can be compromised if the language of that service is delivered 
in a language incomprehensible to migrant women.
METHODS: Qualitative descriptive study using 9 in-depth individual interviews
with Polish women who recently had experience of local maternity services.
Recorded interviews were transcribed and thematically analysed. A salutogenic
conceptual framework was adopted for data analysis.
FINDINGS: Three descriptive themes: 'Communication and understanding',
'Relationships matter' and Values and expectations'. Seven related subthemes
where identified.
DISCUSSION: Vulnerability in this study is understood as uncertainty, risk and
emotional exposure to situations that are not understandable. Applying a
salutogenic lens to analysis reveals the significance of quality communication,
relationship and culturally sensitive practices as ways of mitigating feelings of
vulnerability in the host country. Antonovski's Sense of Coherence' (SoC)
highlights migrant women's ability to comprehend and capacity to understand their
unique experiences of communication challenges. Participant's psychosocial,
cultural, and individual beliefs reveal an ability to trust maternity systems
that are different from their own cultural values and help them move towards a
Sense of Coherence (SOC) and face their vulnerability.
CONCLUSION: Working with migrant women requires a salutary focus. Maternity care 
professionals involved in the care of this population need to consider individual
internal and external resources and avoid treating migrant women as a problematic
group. Maternity care provision needs to acknowledge migrant women's strengths,
values and expectations and adapt local services. This is done by addressing
individual woman's needs through a salutary focus, person-centredness and a
system of care that values relationships and social connectedness.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.midw.2019.02.004 
PMID: 30771608  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


169. HERD. 2019 Oct;12(4):67-98. doi: 10.1177/1937586719826058. Epub 2019 Feb 15.

The Impact of the Physical Environment on Intrapartum Maternity Care:
Identification of Eight Crucial Building Spaces.

Setola N(1), Naldi E(1), Cocina GG(2), Eide LB(3), Iannuzzi L(4), Daly D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Architecture, Università di Firenze, Firenze, Italy.
(2)Department of Architecture and Design, Politecnico di Torino, Turin, Italy.
(3)Department of Child Welfare and Social Work, UiT The Arctic University of
Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
(4)Department of Health Care Professions, Careggi University Hospital, Firenze,
Italy.
(5)School of Nursing and Midwifery, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

OBJECTIVES, PURPOSE, OR AIM: This article investigates whether the physical
environment in which childbirth occurs impacts the intrapartum intervention rates
and how this might happen. The study explores the spatial physical
characteristics that can support the design of spaces to promote the health and
well-being of women, their supporters, and maternity care professionals.
BACKGROUND: Medical interventions during childbirth have consequences for the
health of women and babies in the immediate and long term. The increase in
interventions is multifactorial and may be influenced by the model of care
adopted, the relationships between caregivers and the organizational culture,
which is made up of many factors, including the built environment. In the field
of birth architecture research, there is a gap in the description of the physical
characteristics of birth environments that impact users' health.
METHOD: A scoping review on the topic was performed to understand the direct and 
indirect impacts of the physical environment on birth intervention rates.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: The findings are organized into three tables reporting
the influence that the physical characteristics of a space might have on people's
behaviors, experiences, practices and birth health outcomes. Eight building
spaces that require further investigation and research were highlighted: unit
layout configuration, midwives' hub/desk, social room, birth philosophy vectors, 
configuration of the birth room, size and shape of the birth room, filter, and
sensory elements.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings show the importance of considering the physical
environment in maternity care and that further interdisciplinary studies focused 
on architectural design are needed to enrich the knowledge and evidence on this
topic and to develop accurate recommendations for designers.

DOI: 10.1177/1937586719826058 
PMID: 30767614  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Zdr Varst. 2019 Jan 21;58(1):31-39. doi: 10.2478/sjph-2019-0004. eCollection 2019
Mar.

Validation of the Slovenian Version of Short Sense of Coherence Questionnaire
(SOC-13) in Multiple Sclerosis Patients.

Stern B(1)(2), Socan G(3), Rener-Sitar K(4), Kukec A(2), Zaletel-Kragelj L(2).

Author information: 
(1)University Clinical Centre Maribor, Department of Neurologic Diseases,
Ljubljanska 5, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia.
(2)University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Chair of Public Health, Zaloška 
4, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(3)University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Arts, Department of Psychology, Aškerčeva 
2, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(4)University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Prosthodontics,
Hrvatski trg 6, 1000Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Aim: To validate the Slovenian version (SOC-13-SVN) of Sense of Coherence 13-item
instrument (SOC-13) in Slovenian multiple sclerosis (MS) patients.
Methods: A consecutive 134 Slovenian MS patients were enrolled in a
cross-sectional study in 2013. The reliability of the SOC-13-SVN was assessed for
internal consistency by Cronbach's alpha coefficient (α), dimensionality by the
confirmatory factor analysis (CFA), and criterion validity by Pearson correlation
coefficient (r) between SOC-13-SVN global score and MSQOL-54 composite scores -
Mental Health Composite score (MHC) and Physical Health Composite score (PHC).
Results: For the SOC-13-SVN instrument as a whole, internal consistency was high 
(αtotal=0.88) while it was low for three subscales (αcomprehensibility=0.79;
αmanageability=0.66; αmeaningfulness=0.69). The results of the CFA confirmed a
three-factor structure with good fit (RMSEA=0.059, CFI=0.953, SRMR=0.065),
however, the correlations between the factors were very high
(rcomprehensibility/manageability=0.938; rcomprehensibility/meaningfulness=0.811;
rmanageability/meaningfulness=0.930). The criterion validity analysis showed a
moderate positive strength of relationship between SOC-13-SVN global score and
both MSQOL-54 composite scores (MHC: r=0.597, p<0.001; PHC: r=0.437, p<0.001).
Conclusion: Analysis of some psychometric properties confirmed that this
instrument is a reliable and valid tool for use in Slovenian MS patients. Despite
the three-dimensional structure of the instrument, the use of the global summary 
score is encouraged due to the low reliability of the subscale scores and high
correlations between them.

Publisher: Ovrednotiti psihometrične lastnosti slovenske verzije (SOC-13-SVN)
kratkega vprašalnika o občutku skladnosti s 13 postavkami (SOC-13) pri bolnikih z
multiplo sklerozo (MS).V presečno raziskavo, ki je potekala leta 2013, je bilo
vključenih 134 slovenskih bolnikov z MS. Zanesljivost kot notranjo skladnost
SOC-13-SVN smo ocenili s Cronbachovim koeficientom alfa (α), komponentno
strukturo s potrditveno faktorsko analizo (PFA) in kriterijsko veljavnost s
Pearsonovim korelacijskim koeficientom (r) med celokupno vsoto postavk SOC-13-SVN
in dveh vsot postavk vprašalnika o kakovosti življenja pri MS (MSQOL-54) – vsoto 
postavk duševnega zdravja (MHC) in vsoto postavk telesnega zdravja (PHC).Analiza 
SOC-13-SVN je pokazala, da ima instrument kot celota visoko notranjo skladnost (α
skupni = 0,88), medtem ko je bila notranja skladnost za posamezno podlestvico
nizka (α razumljivost = 0,79; α upravljivost = 0,66; α smiselnost = 0,69).
Rezultati PFA so potrdili trikomponentno strukturo z dobrim prileganjem (RMSEA = 
0,059, CFI = 0,953, SRMR = 0,065), vendar pa je bila korelacija med komponentami 
zelo visoka (r razumljivost/upravljivost = 0,938; r razumljivost/smiselnost =
0,811; r upravljivost/smiselnost = 0,930). Rezultati analize kriterijske
veljavnosti so pokazali zmerno moč povezanosti med celokupno vsoto postavk SOC
13-SVN ter MHC in PHC vsotama postavk MSQOL-54 (MHC: r = 0,597, p < 0,001; PHC: r
= 0,437, p < 0,001).Analiza nekaterih psihometričnih lastnosti je pokazala, da je
SOC-13 SVN zanesljivo in veljavno orodje za uporabo pri slovenskih bolnikih z MS.
Čeprav so rezultati potrdili tridimenzionalnost strukture vprašalnika, zaradi
nizke zanesljivosti podlestvic in visoke korelacije med njimi priporočamo uporabo
orodja kot celote.
DOI: 10.2478/sjph-2019-0004 
PMCID: PMC6368672
PMID: 30745948 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare no
conflict of interest.


171. Wiad Lek. 2018;71(9):1774-1776.

Sense of coherence in selected allergic diseases.

Badura-Brzoza K(1), Piegza M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department Of Psychiatry In Tarnowskie Gory, School Of Medicine With The
Division Of Dentistry In Zabrze, Medical University Of Silesia, Zabrze, Polska.

According to "holistic" model of physician's approach to the patient, physical,
psychological and social aspects should be taken into account when we assess
disease and effects of diagnostics and treatment. Those attributes form health
related quality of life. Patient's disposition to disease depends on many
psychological factors, among them sense of coherence (SOC). Sense of coherence is
a health-promoting life orientation, perceiving the world as comprehensible,
manageable and meaningful. The prevalence of allergic diseases is dramatically
increasing. This epidemy strongly influences comfort of patient's life. In our
paper we try to present the current knowledge on sense of coherence as a factor
potentially influencing the course of allergic diseases.


PMID: 30737939  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Eur Urol. 2019 Jun;75(6):e168-e169. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2019.01.043. Epub 2019 
Feb 4.

Re: Rano Matta, Christopher J.D. Wallis, Mitchell G. Goldenberg, et al. Variation
and Trends in Antidepressant Prescribing for Men Undergoing Treatment for
Nonmetastatic Prostate Cancer: A Population-based Cohort Study. Eur Urol
2019;75:3-7: Translational Potential of Dual Detection: Depression Diagnosis plus
Sense of Coherence Determination in Prostate Cancer.

Vale S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Investigation Unit, Laboratorios Trinidad, Tlaxcala, Mexico. Electronic
address: svalemayorga@yahoo.com.mx.

Comment on
    Eur Urol. 2019 Jan;75(1):3-7.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eururo.2019.01.043 
PMID: 30732926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2019 May;34(5):745-755. doi: 10.1002/gps.5082. Epub
2019 Mar 11.

Relationship quality and sense of coherence in dementia: Results of a European
cohort study.

Marques MJ(1), Woods B(2), Hopper L(3), Jelley H(2), Irving K(3), Kerpershoek
L(4), Meyer G(5), Bieber A(5), Stephan A(5), Sköldunger A(6), Sjölund BM(6)(7),
Selbaek G(8)(9)(10), Rosvik J(8)(11), Zanetti O(12), Portolani E(12), de Vugt
M(4), Verhey F(4), Gonçalves-Pereira M(1); Actifcare Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)CEDOC, NOVA Medical School/Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Universidade Nova de
Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Dementia Services Development Centre (DSDC) Wales, Bangor University, Bangor, 
UK.
(3)School of Nursing and Human Sciences, Dublin City University, Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Alzheimer Centre Limburg, School for Mental Health and Neurosciences,
Department of Psychiatry and Neuropsychology, Maastricht University, Maastricht, 
The Netherlands.
(5)Institute for Health and Nursing Science, Martin Luther University
Halle-Wittenberg, Halle (Saale), Germany.
(6)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Department of Health and Caring Sciences, University of Gävle, Gävle, Sweden.
(8)Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Ageing and Health, Vestfold Hospital
Trust, Tønsberg, Norway.
(9)Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(10)Centre for Old Age Psychiatric Research, Innlandet Hospital Trust, Ottestad, 
Norway.
(11)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(12)IRCCS Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: Quality of life of people with dementia and their family carers is
strongly influenced by interpersonal issues and personal resources. In this
context, relationship quality (RQ) and sense of coherence (SOC) potentially
protect and promote health. We aimed to identify what influences RQ in dyads of
people with dementia and their carers and to examine differences in their
perspectives.
METHODS: Cross-sectional data were used from the Actifcare cohort study of 451
community-dwelling people with dementia and their primary carers in eight
European countries. Comprehensive assessments included the Positive Affect Index 
(RQ) and the Orientation to Life Questionnaire (SOC).
RESULTS: Regression analyses revealed that RQ as perceived by people with
dementia was associated with carer education, stress, and spouse caregiving. RQ
as perceived by carers was associated with carer stress, depression, being a
spouse, social support, reported neuropsychiatric symptoms of dementia, and carer
SOC. Neuropsychiatric symptoms and carer stress contributed to discrepancies in
RQ ratings within the dyad. The only factor associated with both individual RQ
ratings and discrepancies was carer stress (negative feelings subscore). No
significant differences in the overall perception of RQ were evident between
spouses and adult children carers, but RQ determinants differed between the two.
CONCLUSIONS: In this European sample, carer SOC was associated with
carer-reported RQ. RQ determinants differed according to the perspective
considered (person with dementia or carer) and carer subgroup. A deeper
understanding of RQ and its determinants will help to tailor interventions that
address these distinct perspectives and potentially improve dementia outcomes.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.5082 
PMID: 30729572  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Int Nurs Rev. 2019 Jun;66(2):290-298. doi: 10.1111/inr.12504. Epub 2019 Feb 6.

Developing personal sense of risk: a grounded theory in men with hypertension.

Seesawang J(1), Bowers B(1), Sansiriphun N(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Faculty of Nursing, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: For older men with hypertension living in rural areas, non-adherence 
to treatment is a common phenomenon. The experience on risk perception of
individuals with their condition is recognized as playing a critical role in
promoting treatment adherence. However, the experience on risk perception in a
cohort of older men with hypertension seems unclear.
AIM: To develop a theory concerning risk perception experience in a cohort of
older men with hypertension from a rural area of Thailand.
METHODS: A grounded theory approach was used. Semi-structured, face-to-face
interviews with 29 hypertensive older men were conducted in Thailand using
purposive and theoretical sampling methods. The grounded theory analytical method
that included initial and focused coding, and constant comparison was used to
analyse the data.
FINDINGS: 'Developing a personal sense of risk' emerged as a core category, which
incorporated the related four subprocesses: comparing healthcare provider
information with stories of people with hypertension, comparing one's own
situation with stories of people with hypertension, changing personal sense of
risk and changing risk-related behaviour. Older men selected to focus on one
particular outcome, using the selected outcome to monitor their risk.
CONCLUSION: This investigation provides a theory for healthcare providers to
understand older men's perceptions of personal risk for complications of
hypertension. A personal sense of risk influences risk-related behaviour change.
IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING AND HEALTH POLICY: The findings can be used in assessing
a personal sense of risk and promoting treatment adherence in older men with
hypertension. Effective storytelling intervention, a standard tool for assessment
personal sense of risk in older men with hypertension, should be developed.
Hypertension care policy needs to be developed for individualized approaches.

© 2019 International Council of Nurses.

DOI: 10.1111/inr.12504 
PMID: 30729518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Psychiatry Res. 2019 Mar;273:559-566. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2019.01.088. Epub
2019 Jan 30.

Coping resources and stress reactions among Bedouin Arab adolescents during three
military operations.

Abu-Kaf S(1), Braun-Lewensohn O(2).

Author information: 
(1)Conflict Management & Resolution Program, Department of Interdisciplinary
Studies, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, P.O. Box 653, Beer-Sheva 8410501,
Israel. Electronic address: aks@bgu.ac.il.
(2)Conflict Management & Resolution Program, Department of Interdisciplinary
Studies, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, P.O. Box 653, Beer-Sheva 8410501,
Israel.

This study aimed to examine coping resources (sense of coherence and hope) and
stress reactions among Bedouin Arab adolescents in southern Israel during three
periods of escalated political violence. Two main questions were examined: 1) Did
adolescents report different coping resources and levels of stress reactions
during these three different periods? 2) Were there any differences in the
pattern of the associations between coping resources and stress reactions across 
those periods? Data were gathered from 81, 91, and 192 Bedouin Arab adolescents, 
who were 14-18 years old, during three periods. Participants completed
self-report questionnaires including the sense of coherence (SOC) scale, a hope
index, a measure or state anxiety and state anger, a measure of psychological
distress, and a demographic questionnaire. Across the three periods, differences 
were observed in both coping resources and levels of stress reactions. Over time,
SOC was found to be a significant predictor of those stress reactions; whereas
the association between hope components and stress reactions weakened over time. 
These findings support the hypothesis that SOC is a significant component of
coping with stressful political events and emphasize the importance of addressing
differences in the roles of personal resources over time and transition
processes.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2019.01.088 
PMID: 30716595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Health Promot Int. 2020 Feb 1;35(1):140-150. doi: 10.1093/heapro/day122.

'Singing has empowered, enchanted and enthralled me'-choirs for wellbeing?

Batt-Rawden K(1), Andersen S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Department of Health
Sciences, Gjøvik, Norway.
(2)General Practitioner at Herstmonceux Integrative Health Centre, Hailsham, East
Sussex, UK.

Singing in groups is a global phenomenon and there is a growing body of evidence 
that singing can affect health and wellbeing. This is the first gender-based
study to explore how women's perceptions of their own health and wellbeing can be
affected by singing in a choir; and also how choral singing may have an impact on
social inclusion. Qualitative data was collected from nine choirs in two regions 
of Norway. The sample consisted of 19 (n = 19) women aged 21-75 (mean age, 51.3.)
who had sung in choirs from 6 months to 20 years (mean, 6.2 years). The sample
population included those who identified as 'healthy' and those experiencing
health issues such as cancer, depression, anxiety or fatigue. Two focus groups
and 16 semi-structured interviews were carried out and the data were analyzed
using grounded theory. Findings were that choral singing can affect women's
perceptions of their wellbeing in four distinct ways: (i) through the joy of
singing, (ii) experiencing singing as essential for survival, (iii) group singing
as a route to social connection, which enhanced a sense of identity and of
belonging, and thereby increased self-confidence and self-esteem and (iv) through
promoting social inclusion. In the context of these findings, choral singing can 
be understood as a 'salutogenic' activity, that is, one that supports health and 
wellbeing. This has implications for self-care practice, social prescribing
programs and public health policy.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/day122 
PMID: 30715392  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


177. IEEE Trans Image Process. 2019 Jul;28(7):3372-3382. doi:
10.1109/TIP.2019.2896517. Epub 2019 Jan 31.

Multi-Modal Non-Line-of-Sight Passive Imaging.

Beckus A, Tamasan A, Atia GK.

We consider the non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging of an object using the light
reflected off a diffusive wall. The wall scatters incident light such that a lens
is no longer useful to form an image. Instead, we exploit the 4D spatial
coherence function to reconstruct a 2D projection of the obscured object. The
approach is completely passive in the sense that no control over the light
illuminating the object is assumed and is compatible with the partially coherent 
fields ubiquitous in both the indoor and outdoor environments. We formulate a
multi-criteria convex optimization problem for reconstruction, which fuses the
reflected field's intensity and spatial coherence information at different
scales. Our formulation leverages established optics models of light propagation 
and scattering and exploits the sparsity common to many images in different
bases. We also develop an algorithm based on the alternating direction method of 
multipliers to efficiently solve the convex program proposed. A means for
analyzing the null space of the measurement matrices is provided as well as a
means for weighting the contribution of individual measurements to the
reconstruction. This paper holds promise to advance passive imaging in the
challenging NLOS regimes in which the intensity does not necessarily retain
distinguishable features and provides a framework for multi-modal information
fusion for efficient scene reconstruction.

DOI: 10.1109/TIP.2019.2896517 
PMID: 30714922 


178. Scand J Prim Health Care. 2019 Mar;37(1):98-104. doi:
10.1080/02813432.2019.1569371. Epub 2019 Feb 2.

One-session cognitive behavior treatment for long-term frequent attenders in
primary care: randomized controlled trial.

Luutonen S(1)(2), Santalahti A(3), Mäkinen M(4), Vahlberg T(5), Rautava P(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Psychiatry , University of Turku , Turku , Finland.
(2)b Turku University Hospital , Turku , Finland.
(3)c Health and social care of Ylöjärvi , Ylöjärvi , Finland.
(4)d Welfare Division , City of Turku , Finland.
(5)e Department of Biostatistics, Faculty of Medicine , University of Turku ,
Turku , Finland.
(6)f Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine , University of Turku ,
Turku , Finland.
(7)g Turku Clinical Research Centre , Turku University Hospital , Turku ,
Finland.

AIM: The aim of the study was to find out, if a single cognitive behavior
treatment (CBT) session for long-term frequent attenders in primary care affects 
the attendance frequency and mental well-being of the patients.
METHODS: Out of 193 long-term frequent attenders, 56 participated and were
randomized to receive either a one-session CBT intervention or usual care. The
groups were compared to each other regarding change in general practitioner
visits and change in depressive symptoms, sense of coherence, somatoform symptoms
and hypochondriacal anxiety at six months' follow-up.
RESULTS: The attendance frequency decreased in both groups, but there was no
difference between the groups. Changes in mental functioning did not differ
between the groups. When patients with no mental health disorder were analyzed
separately, the decrease in GP visits was significantly higher in the
intervention group than in the control group (p = .004).
CONCLUSION: A single session of CBT is not useful in reducing GP visits or
improving mental well-being of long-term frequent attenders. Frequent attenders
without a psychiatric disorder may benefit from this kind of intervention.

DOI: 10.1080/02813432.2019.1569371 
PMCID: PMC6452827
PMID: 30712444  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Integr Psychol Behav Sci. 2019 Sep;53(3):431-449. doi: 10.1007/s12124-019-9475-9.

The Semiotic Construction of the Sense of Agency. The Modal Articulation in
Narrative Processes.

De Luca Picione R(1), Martino ML(2), Troisi G(3).

Author information: 
(1)SInAPSi (Center for Active and Integrated Inclusion of Students) and
Department of Humanistic Studies, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.
raffaele.delucapicione@unina.it.
(2)SInAPSi (Center for Active and Integrated Inclusion of Students) and
Department of Humanistic Studies, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Humanistic Studies, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.

The sense of agency is an ongoing process of semiotic construction of the action 
starting from the affective, cognitive, intersubjective and cultural matrix of
experience. A person narratively constructs the sense of her agentive experience 
and in doing so does not refer exclusively to the "what", but also to the "how". 
There is always a specific "modus" to experience one's own action. We present the
psychological notion of the Modal Articulation Process (MAP), namely the way
through which a person orients and configures in a contextual frame the sense of 
her actions by means of modal operators of necessity, possibility, impossibility,
contingency, but also knowledge, will, capability, constrain and opportunity. The
notion of Modal Articulation Process is proposed as a semiotic, dynamic and
recursive process that articulates narratively many aspects of the agency: the
relational positionings and the way of experiencing them, the constraints and the
resources present in the socio-symbolic context, the inherent temporality of
every human phenomenon. Although the study of modal operators has an ancient and 
solid tradition of research in the fields of modal logics, analytical philosophy 
and narrative semiotic disciplines as well, yet in the field of the psychological
sciences - except for a few authoritative isolated cases (Kurt Lewin, Rom Harrè, 
Jaan Valsiner) - there is not a great deal of attention on the relevance of these
symbolic devices and their function in constructing the sense of action in a
narrative way. Indeed modal articulation processes are at stake both during daily
common routines and during exceptional turning point experiences that request a
reconfiguration of the sense of one's own agency (e.g. the experiences of illness
demand a new modal re-articulation). Our discussion is aimed at deepening and
developing the notion of modal articulation, its functions and its specificities.

DOI: 10.1007/s12124-019-9475-9 
PMID: 30712226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Integr Psychol Behav Sci. 2019 Sep;53(3):463-483. doi: 10.1007/s12124-019-9476-8.

The 'Self' Aspects: the Sense of the Existence, Identification, and Location.

Reddy JSK(1), Roy S(2), de Souza Leite E(3), Pereira A Jr(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Scholar, Bangalore, 560064, India. jumpalreddy@live.com.
(2)Consciousness Studies Programme, National Institute of Advanced Studies,
Bangalore, 560064, India.
(3)Instituto de Biociências de Botucatu, São Paulo State University, São Paulo,
Brazil.

The present article is limited to research studies focused on understanding the
phenomenon and construction of the concept of 'Self.' When we look at one's
experience of the Self, as a whole, it involves various components associated
with different aspects like self-identification, self-location and the sense of
the existence of oneself or the sense of Self. While exploring the Self
phenomenon, many scientific studies consider only partial aspects of the
experience, and hence any understanding resulting from such an evaluation makes
it difficult to comment on the nature of the Self. We emphasize that while
studying the Self, to understand it totally, one would need to include all the
components of the Self. In this connection, we raise the following two theses: a)
Ontologically, the Self is conceived as a sentient entity, the bearer of the
"what it is like to be" type of feeling, and b) Phenomenologically, we do not
have a direct apprehension of the Self, but experience various aspects of the
Self through the Senses of Existence, Identification, and Location.

DOI: 10.1007/s12124-019-9476-8 
PMID: 30710322  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Br J Ophthalmol. 2019 Nov;103(11):1590-1594. doi:
10.1136/bjophthalmol-2018-313002. Epub 2019 Jan 31.

Retinal microvascular abnormalities in neurofibromatosis type 1.

Moramarco A(1), Miraglia E(2), Mallone F(3), Roberti V(2), Iacovino C(2),
Bruscolini A(3), Giustolisi R(3)(4), Giustini S(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organ of Sense, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy
antonietta.moramarco@uniroma1.it.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Organ of Sense, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical Dermatology, University of Rome "Sapienza", Rome,
Italy.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to provide a classification of the different
retinal vascular arrangements in neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1), with appropriate
qualitative and quantitative information.
METHODS: This study was conducted on 334 consecutive patients with NF1 and 106
sex-matched and age-matched healthy control subjects. Each patient underwent a
comprehensive ophthalmological examination inclusive of near-infrared reflectance
retinography by using the spectral domain Optical coherence tomography (OCT), a
complete dermatological examination and 1.5 T MRI scan of the brain to assess the
presence of optic nerve gliomas. To evaluate the predictability and the
diagnostic accuracy of our identified retinal microvascular arrangements, we
calculated the diagnostic indicators for each pattern of pathology, with
corresponding 95% CI. In addition, we evaluated the association between the
microvascular arrangements and each National Institutes of Health diagnostic
criteria.
RESULTS: Microvascular abnormalities were detected in 105 of 334 NF1 patients
(31.4%), the simple vascular tortuosity was recognised in 78 of 105 cases (74.3%)
and whether the corkscrew pattern and the moyamoya-like type showed a frequency
of 42.8% (45 of 105 cases) and 15.2% (16 of 105 cases), respectively. We found a 
statistically significant correlation between the presence of retinal
microvascular abnormalities and the patient age (p=0.02) and between the simple
vascular tortuosity, the patient age and the presence of neurofibromas (p=0.002
and p=0.05, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified microvascular alterations in 31.4% of patients and a
statistically significant association with patient age. Moreover, the most
frequent type of microvascular alterations, the simple vascular tortuosity,
resulted positively associated with age and with the presence of neurofibromas.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2018-313002 
PMID: 30705042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


182. BMC Geriatr. 2019 Jan 30;19(1):29. doi: 10.1186/s12877-019-1038-x.

A multicenter investigation of reablement in Norway: a clinical controlled trial.

Langeland E(1)(2), Tuntland H(3)(4), Folkestad B(3)(5), Førland O(3)(6), Jacobsen
FF(3)(6), Kjeken I(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Care Research Western Norway, Western Norway University of Applied 
Sciences, P.O Box 7030, 5020, Bergen, Norway. eva.langeland@hvl.no.
(2)Department of Health and Caring Science, Faculty of Health and Social
Sciences, Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, P.O Box 7030, 5020,
Bergen, Norway. eva.langeland@hvl.no.
(3)Centre for Care Research Western Norway, Western Norway University of Applied 
Sciences, P.O Box 7030, 5020, Bergen, Norway.
(4)Department of Health and Functioning, Faculty of Health and Social Sciences,
Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, P.O Box 7030, 5020, Bergen,
Norway.
(5)Uni Research Rokkan Centre, Bergen, Norway.
(6)Faculty of Health Studies, VID Specialized University, Campus Bergen,
Ulriksdal 10, 5009, Bergen, Norway.
(7)National Advisory Unit on Rehabilitation in Rheumatology, Diakonhjemmet
Hospital, P.O. Box 23, Vinderen, 0319, Oslo, Norway.
(8)Department of Occupational Therapy, Prosthetics and Orthotics, Faculty of
Health Sciences, Oslo Metropolitan University, P.O. Box 4, St. Olavs plass, 0130,
Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Reablement is an emerging approach in rehabilitation services, but
evidence for its efficacy is rather weak and inconsistent. The purpose of the
present study is therefore to investigate the health effects of reablement in
home-dwelling adults.
METHODS: A multicenter, clinical controlled trial involving 47 municipalities in 
Norway, with assessments at baseline, and after 10 weeks and at 6 and 12 months. 
The sample consisted of 707 persons that received a 4-10 week reablement program 
and 121 underwent treatment as usual. Primary outcomes were activity performance 
and satisfaction with performance measured by the Canadian Occupational
Performance Measure (COPM, 1-10). Secondary outcomes included the Short Physical 
Performance Measure Battery (SPPB), the European Quality of Life Scale
(EQ-5D-5 L), and the Sense of Coherence Questionnaire (SOC). Overall treatment
effects were estimated with mixed-model repeated measures analyses.
RESULTS: Significant treatment effects in the rehabilitation group compared with 
the control group were found in COPM-Performance and COPM-Satisfaction scores at 
10 weeks (mean differences between groups (MD), 1.61, 95% confidence interval
(CI), 1.13, 2.10 and MD 1.47, CI 0.98, 1.97, respectively), and at 6 months (MD
1.42; CI 0.82,2.02 and MD 1.37; CI 0.77,1.98, respectively). There were also
significant treatment effects in the SPPB-subscales for balance and walking after
6 months, in the total SPPB score and in the subscale for sit-to-stand after
12 months. In the EQ-5D-5 L assessment, significant treatment effects were found 
in the subscales for mobility, and for usual activities and health after
6 months. There was a significant difference in the SOC after six months.
CONCLUSION: Reablement seems to be a more effective rehabilitation service for
persons with functional decline than traditional home-based services after six
months. After 12 months, the differences between the groups decreased.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: The trial was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov on October 24,
2014, (retrospectively registered) identifier: NCT02273934 .

DOI: 10.1186/s12877-019-1038-x 
PMCID: PMC6354362
PMID: 30700255  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Behav Sci (Basel). 2019 Jan 28;9(2). pii: E14. doi: 10.3390/bs9020014.

Sense of Coherence and Caregivers of Persons with Dementia.

Childers KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing Student in Ph. D Nursing Program, West Virginia University
Morgantown, WV 26506-9600, USA. kchilders@mix.wvu.edu.

Unpaid caregivers (CG) provide most of the assistance to persons with dementias
(PWD) living in the community. This study explores the current state of knowledge
regarding the concept of sense of coherence (SOC) and CG of PWD via a concept
analysis. The identified defining attributes were health, health-related quality 
of life (HRQoL), CG burden, CG stress, coping as a strength, gender, and
decreasing sense of CG coherence over the progression of the disease (dementia). 
Further study by health care professionals using clinical observations, large
samples of respondents, a consistent theory, valid and reliable instruments used 
to measure defining attributes consistently, and critical reviews of the
literature are needed.

DOI: 10.3390/bs9020014 
PMCID: PMC6406261
PMID: 30696071 


184. Eur J Psychotraumatol. 2019 Jan 17;10(1):1562839. doi:
10.1080/20008198.2018.1562839. eCollection 2019.

The relationship between sense of coherence and post-traumatic stress: a
meta-analysis.

Schäfer SK(1), Becker N(2), King L(3), Horsch A(4)(5), Michael T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Department of Psychology,
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany.
(2)Individual Differences & Psychodiagnostics, Department of Psychology, Saarland
University, Saarbrücken, Germany.
(3)The Oxford Institute of Clinical Psychology Training, Isis Education Centre,
Warneford Hospital, Oxford, UK.
(4)Department Woman-Mother-Child, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne,
Switzerland.
(5)Institute of Higher Education in Healthcare Research, University of Lausanne, 
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Background: Antonovsky's concept of sense of coherence (SOC) - as a global
orientation reflecting an individual's feeling of confidence in both the
predictability of their internal and external environment and their ability to
cope with stressful and challenging situations in life - shows a negative
association with symptoms of post-traumatic stress. However, single studies
varying in study characteristics provide heterogeneous effect size estimations.
Objective: The purpose of the current study is to investigate the relationship
between SOC and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptom severity for the
first time on a meta-analytical level. Method: The random-effects meta-analysis
is based on zero-order correlations (r) and consists of 47 independent samples
out of 45 studies (N = 10,883). Results: After correcting for sampling error, the
mean correlation between SOC and PTSD symptoms was M(r) = -.41 (excluding four
outliers: -.39). However, this effect could not be generalized to all types of
PTSD samples owing to substantial remaining heterogeneity. Subsequent moderator
analyses investigating the influence of different SOC and PTSD measures, trauma
type and duration, mean age and gender imbalances per sample did not reveal
significant moderating effects. Conclusions: The meta-analysis reveals a
substantial correlation between SOC and PTSD symptom severity: higher SOC levels 
are associated with lower symptom severity. Thus, future research should progress
to the question of whether the relationship between SOC and post-traumatic stress
is causal, and by which factors it is moderated. Abbreviations: CD, Cook's
distance; DSM, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders; (G)RR,
general (and specific) resistance resources; IES(-R), Impact of Event Scale
(Revised); PDS, Posttraumatic Stress Diagnostic Scale; PRISMA, Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses; PTSD, post-traumatic
stress disorder; SDR, standard deleted residual; SOC, sense of coherence; SOC-R, 
Sense of Coherence Scale - Revised.

Publisher: Antecedentes: El concepto de sentido de coherencia (SOC) de
Antonovsky- como una orientación global reflejando el sentimiento de seguridad de
un individuo, tanto en la previsibilidad de su ambiente interno y externo y su
habilidad para enfrentar situaciones estresantes y desafiantes en su vida-
muestra una asociación negativa con el estrés postraumático. Sin embargo,
estudios individuales que varían en las características proporcionan estimaciones
del tamaño del efecto heterogéneo.Objetivo: El propósito de este estudio es
investigar la relación entre SOC y severidad de los síntomas de TEPT por primera 
vez a un nivel metaanalítico.Método: El metanálisis de efectos aleatorios se basa
en correlaciones de orden cero (r) y consta de 47 muestras independientes de 45
estudios (N= 10.883).Resultados: Después de corregir por error de muestreo, la
correlación media entre SOC y síntomas de TEPT fue M(r) =−.41 (excluyendo cuatro 
valores atípicos: −.39). Sin embargo, este efecto podría no ser generalizado a
todos los tipos de muestras de TEPT debido a la importante heterogeneidad
restante. Los siguientes análisis del moderador investigan la influencia de
diferentes mediciones de SOC y TEPT, tipo de trauma y duración, edad media y
desbalance de género por muestra no revela efectos moderados
significativos.Conclusiones: El metanálisis revela una importante correlación
entre SOC y severidad de los síntomas de TEPT: Niveles más altos de SOC están
asociados con menor severidad de los síntomas. De este modo, las investigaciones 
futuras deberían progresar a la pregunta de si la relación entre SOC y estrés
postraumático es causal, y por cuáles factores es moderada.Publisher:
背景：Antonovsky的心理一致感（SOC）概念——作为反映个人对其内在和外在环境的可预测性及其应对生活中的压力和挑战的信心的整体取向——显示出与创伤后应激症
状的负相关。然而，各个研究的特征不同导致了效应量估计的差异。目的：本研究的目的是首次在元分析水平上研究SOC与PTSD症状严重程度之间的关系。方法：随机效应元分析
基于零阶相关（r），由45项研究中的47个独立样本组成（N = 10883）。结果：在校正抽样误差后，SOC和PTSD症状之间的平均相关性为M（r）=
−.41（不包括四个异常值：-.39）。然而，由于异质性依然明显存在，这种效应不能推广到所有类型的PTSD样品。之后使用调节分析考察不同SOC和
PTSD量表、创伤类型和持续时间、平均年龄和样本的性别失衡的影响，并未发现显著的调节作用。结论：元分析显示SOC与PTSD症状严重程度之间存在显著相关性：较高的S
OC水平与较低的症状严重程度相关。因此，未来的研究应该进展到SOC与创伤后应激之间的关系是否是因果关系以及由哪些因素调节。.
DOI: 10.1080/20008198.2018.1562839 
PMCID: PMC6338278
PMID: 30693079 


185. Pain Res Treat. 2018 Dec 2;2018:9451313. doi: 10.1155/2018/9451313. eCollection
2018.

Vulnerability and Resilience in Patients with Chronic Pain in Occupational
Healthcare: A Pilot Study with a Patient-Centered Approach.

Peilot B(1), Andréll P(1), Gottfries J(2), Sundler AJ(3), Mannheimer C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Clinical Medicine/Pain Centre, Institute of
Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska
University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biology, Gothenburg University, Sweden.
(3)Faculty of Caring Science, Work Life and Social Wellfare, University of Borås,
Sweden.

Objectives: The aim of this pilot study was to describe vulnerability and
resilience and possible subgroups in patients with chronic work related
musculoskeletal pain in occupational healthcare. A second aim was to evaluate a
patient-centered approach.
Methods: This study was based on consecutive patients with chronic pain, seen by 
the same physician and sick-listed full or part time three months or longer. They
were included during a period of three months. Patient reported outcome measures 
(PROM) were administered at baseline and at follow-up after 8 months. A
patient-centered approach was applied where the patient's whole situation was
taken into account.
Results: A dominance of an insecure dismissing attachment pattern and a subnormal
sense of coherence (SOC) was reported both at baseline and at follow-up. The
patients (n=38) reported significant improvement of pain severity (p=0.01), pain 
interference (p=0.001), life control (p=0.01), affective distress (p=0.02), and
dysfunction (p=0.001) on the multidimensional pain inventory (MPI) and fewer
patients were sick-listed full time at follow-up (13 patients versus 21). By
means of multivariate data analyses this change in MPI was confirmed and was also
correlated with a significant increase in health related quality of life (HRQoL).
Moreover subgroups with different outcome at follow-up were identified according 
to attachment pattern and subgroups on MPI.
Conclusion: A patient-centered approach may be of value for patients with chronic
pain in occupational healthcare, improving pain and dysfunction. Patients with
chronic pain are a heterogeneous group where outcome of treatment might be
influenced by individual resilience and/or vulnerability.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/9451313 
PMCID: PMC6304616
PMID: 30687552 


186. Psychol Psychother. 2020 Jun;93(2):241-257. doi: 10.1111/papt.12217. Epub 2019
Jan 22.

Exploring the implementation of cognitive behaviour therapy for psychosis using
the Normalization Process Theory framework.

Xanidis N(1), Gumley A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Glasgow Institute of Health and Wellbeing, Gartnavel Royal Hospital,
University of Glasgow, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Evidence suggests that only a minority of service users experiencing
psychosis have access to Cognitive Behavioural Therapy for psychosis (CBTp).
Normalization Process Theory (NPT) is a theoretical framework which focuses on
processes by which interventions are implemented and normalized in clinical
practice. This study explored the views and experiences of mental health
professionals regarding the implementation of CBTp. Barriers and facilitators to 
implementation were explored using the NPT framework.
DESIGN: A qualitative methodology was adopted involving semi-structured focus
groups and individual interviews.
METHODS: A total of 14 members of staff working in the community and crisis
mental health teams were recruited. Thematic analysis was used to generate
initial themes. The framework approach was utilized to map initial themes to the 
NPT framework.
RESULTS: Inductive coding generated five overarching themes consisting of 15
individual subthemes which captured the perceived barriers to engagement;
contextual barriers to implementation; optimization of implementation; positive
attitudes towards implementation; and expectations of implementing CBTp. All but 
two subthemes mapped on to the NPT framework. The deductive analysis suggested
that difficulties in making sense of CBTp among professionals were reflected as
service level barriers which impeded wider implementation.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study suggested a mixture of barriers and
facilitators to CBTp implementation. Interpreting our findings within an NPT
framework indicates the importance of strong clinical leadership to address
difficulties in sense-making and service investment in CBTp.
PRACTITIONER POINTS: Findings indicate a mixture of barriers and facilitators to 
CBTp implementation. NPT analysis indicates difficulties in coherence among
stakeholders regarding the purpose and value of CBTp. Difficulties making sense
of CBTp translates into service level barriers and impede the collective action
of stakeholders. The role of clinical leadership is crucial in increasing
coherence and collective action in services.

© 2019 The British Psychological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/papt.12217 
PMID: 30672074  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Br J Health Psychol. 2019 May;24(2):315-333. doi: 10.1111/bjhp.12355. Epub 2019
Jan 22.

Bidirectional relationship of stress and affect with physical activity and
healthy eating.

Schultchen D(1), Reichenberger J(2)(3), Mittl T(1), Weh TRM(1), Smyth JM(4),
Blechert J(2)(3), Pollatos O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Health Psychology, Ulm University, Germany.
(2)Centre for Cognitive Neuroscience, University of Salzburg, Austria.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Salzburg, Austria.
(4)Department of Biobehavioral Health and Medicine, Pennsylvania State
University, State College, Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Physical activity and healthy eating seem to be protective against
experiencing stress and negative affect as well as increase positive affect. At
the same time, previous studies showed that people reduce salutogenic behaviours 
such as physical activity and healthy eating in the face of stress and negative
affect while increasing such behaviours in the context of positive affect. Due to
daily fluctuations of these behaviours, the present study examined these
relationships in daily life using ecological momentary assessment (EMA).
DESIGN AND METHODS: Fifty-one university students responded to six daily prompts 
during 7 days via smartphone-based EMA. Items examined stress, emotional
experience, physical activity duration, and healthy eating.
RESULTS: Higher stress and negative affect, as well as lower positive affect,
were related to a reduction in subsequent physical activity. Higher physical
activity levels, in turn, were associated with less subsequent stress and
negative affect, as well as more positive affect. No such effects for stress and 
affect on healthy eating or vice versa were found.
CONCLUSIONS: Engaging in physical activity is related to better mood and less
stress/negative affect over the next several hours in daily life. Prevention
efforts therefore may benefit by focusing on promoting physical activity,
particularly when stress/negative affect is high to 'break the cycle' of
inactivity, stress, and negative affect. Potential effects of healthy eating
might be more subtle and characterized by interindividual differences or state
effects. Statement of contribution What is already known on this subject?
Physical activity can reduce stress as well as negative emotions and can enhance 
positive emotions. People tend to eat less healthy food during stressful times,
and healthy eating can increase general health. Physical activity and healthy
eating have been mostly assessed separately and through retrospective methods.
What does this study add? This is an EMA study investigating bidirectional
effects of stress, emotions, and salutogenic behaviour. After physical activity, 
people felt less stressed/negative and more positive; feeling better and less
stressed resulted in more physical activity. Healthy eating was not associated
with stress or emotion level and vice versa.

© 2019 The British Psychological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bjhp.12355 
PMCID: PMC6767465
PMID: 30672069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Complement Ther Med. 2019 Feb;42:355-360. doi: 10.1016/j.ctim.2018.12.002. Epub
2018 Dec 5.

Reliability and first validity of the inner correspondence questionnaire for
painting therapy (ICPTh) in a sample of breast cancer patients.

Kröz M(1), Mehl A(2), Didwiszus A(3), Gelin-Kröz B(4), Reif M(5), Berger B(6),
Ten Brink F(7), Zerm R(8), Girke M(9), Gutenbrunner C(10), Büssing A(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine Havelhöhe Hospital, Kladower Damm 221, 14089
Berlin, Germany; Research Institute Havelhöhe, Kladower Damm 221, 14089, Berlin, 
Germany; Institute for Social Medicine, Epidemiology and Health Economics,
Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Luisenstraße 57, 10117, Berlin, Germany;
Institute of Integrative Medicine, Witten/Herdecke University,
Alfred-Herrhausen-Straße 50, 58448, Witten, Germany. Electronic address:
Matthias.Kroez@havelhoehe.de.
(2)Research Institute Havelhöhe, Kladower Damm 221, 14089, Berlin, Germany.
Electronic address: Annette.Mehl@havelhoehe.de.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine Havelhöhe Hospital, Kladower Damm 221, 14089
Berlin, Germany; Research Institute Havelhöhe, Kladower Damm 221, 14089, Berlin, 
Germany. Electronic address: Astrid.Didwiszus@havelhoehe.de.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine Havelhöhe Hospital, Kladower Damm 221, 14089
Berlin, Germany; Research Institute Havelhöhe, Kladower Damm 221, 14089, Berlin, 
Germany. Electronic address: Beatrice.Gelin-Kroez@havelhoehe.de.
(5)Society for Clinical Research, Hardenbergstraße 19, 10623, Berlin, Germany.
Electronic address: marcus.reif@gkf-berlin.de.
(6)Institute of Integrative Medicine, Witten/Herdecke University,
Alfred-Herrhausen-Straße 50, 58448, Witten, Germany. Electronic address:
Bettina.Berger@uni-wh.de.
(7)Clinic for Rehabilitative Medicine, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg-Straße 1, 30625, Hannover, Germany. Electronic address:
tenBrink.Fadime@mh-hannover.de.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine Havelhöhe Hospital, Kladower Damm 221, 14089
Berlin, Germany; Research Institute Havelhöhe, Kladower Damm 221, 14089, Berlin, 
Germany. Electronic address: Roland.Zerm@havelhoehe.de.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine Havelhöhe Hospital, Kladower Damm 221, 14089
Berlin, Germany; Research Institute Havelhöhe, Kladower Damm 221, 14089, Berlin, 
Germany. Electronic address: Matthias.Girke@havelhoehe.de.
(10)Clinic for Rehabilitative Medicine, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg-Straße 1, 30625, Hannover, Germany. Electronic address:
Gutenbrunner.Christoph@mh-hannover.de.
(11)Institute of Integrative Medicine, Witten/Herdecke University,
Alfred-Herrhausen-Straße 50, 58448, Witten, Germany. Electronic address:
Arndt.Buessing@uni-wh.de.

Objectives Art therapy (ArT) such as mindfulness-oriented painting therapy is
increasingly used in psychosomatic, oncological integrative and rehabilitative
medicine. Though it remains unknown how ArT works, we hypothesize that an engaged
participation with painting ('Inner-Correspondence') contributes to improved
symptom scores. In the context of a comprehensive cohort study for breast cancer 
survivors with cancer-related fatigue, we developed a patient-reported outcome
measure to assess 'Inner Correspondence' with painting therapy and conducted a
first validation study. Design A 24-item questionnaire on 'Inner Correspondence' 
(ICPTh) was administered after ten weeks of intervention and at six month
followup together with concurrent scales (Inner Correspondence and Peaceful
Harmony, Cancer Fatigue Scale, Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, Internal
Coherence Scale). Statistical assessment included reliability- and factor
analyses. Results A total of n = 68 BC (mean age, 58.2 years, SD = 8.7)
participated in the preliminary validation study. Exploratory factor analysis
revealed a robust 22-item scale with an unambiguous four-factor solution
explaining 78% of total variance and the following subsales: 1) therapy
congruence and relaxation (11 items), 2) inner development and mood (6 items), 3)
artistic skill (3 items) and 4) task congruence (2 items). The 22-item ICPTh
yielded high reliability (Cronbach's alpha = .966, item-total correlation = .497 
- .883, test-retest reliability = .888). Conclusions We present a reliable
instrument to measure 'Inner Correspondence' with painting therapy. Due to the
small sample size and sample selection further validation studies are indicated.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctim.2018.12.002 
PMID: 30670266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Neuropsychologia. 2019 Mar 4;125:1-13. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.01.002. Epub 2019 Jan 18.

Making sense of social interaction: Emotional coherence drives semantic
integration as assessed by event-related potentials.

Schauenburg G(1), Conrad M(2), von Scheve C(3), Barber HA(4), Ambrasat J(3),
Aryani A(5), Schröder T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Freie Universität Berlin, Department of Psychology, Berlin, Germany.
Electronic address: schaueng@student.hu-berlin.de.
(2)Universidad de La Laguna, Department of Cognitive, Social and Organizational
Psychology, San Cristobal de La Laguna, Spain.
(3)Freie Universität Berlin, Department of Sociology, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Instituto de Tecnologías Biomédicas, Universidad de La Laguna, & Basque Center
on Cognition, Brain and Language (BCBL), Spain.
(5)Freie Universität Berlin, Department of Psychology, Berlin, Germany.
(6)University of Applied Sciences, Potsdam, Germany.

We compared event-related potentials during sentence reading, using impression
formation equations of a model of affective coherence, to investigate the role of
affective content processing during meaning making. The model of Affect Control
Theory (ACT; Heise, 1979, 2007) predicts and quantifies the degree to which
social interactions deflect from prevailing social norms and values - based on
the affective meanings of involved concepts. We tested whether this model can
predict the amplitude of brain waves traditionally associated with semantic
processing. To this end, we visually presented sentences describing basic
subject-verb-object social interactions and measured event-related potentials for
final words of sentences from three different conditions of affective deflection 
(low, medium, high) as computed by a variant of the ACT model (Schröder, 2011).
Sentence stimuli were closely controlled across conditions for alternate semantic
dimensions such as contextual constraints, cloze probabilities, co-occurrences of
subject-object and verb-object relations. Personality characteristics
(schizotypy, Big Five) were assessed to account for individual differences,
assumed to influence emotion-language interactions in information processing.
Affective deflection provoked increased negativity of ERP waves during the P2/N2 
and N400 components. Our data suggest that affective incoherence is perceived as 
conflicting information interfering with early semantic processing and that
increased respective processing demands - in particular in the case of medium
violations of social norms - linger on until the N400 time window classically
associated with the integration of concepts into embedding context. We conclude
from these results that affective meanings influence basic stages of meaning
making.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.01.002 
PMID: 30664854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


190. R Soc Open Sci. 2018 Dec 12;5(12):180885. doi: 10.1098/rsos.180885. eCollection
2018 Dec.

Perceptual integration of head and eye cues to gaze direction in schizophrenia.

Palmer CJ(1), Caruana N(2)(3), Clifford CWG(1), Seymour KJ(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia.
(2)Department of Cognitive Science, Macquarie University, Sydney, New South Wales
2109, Australia.
(3)ARC Centre of Excellence for Cognition and its Disorders, Sydney, Australia.
(4)School of Social Sciences and Psychology, Western Sydney University, Sydney,
New South Wales 2150, Australia.

The perceptual mechanisms that underlie social experience in schizophrenia are
increasingly becoming a target of empirical research. In the context of low-level
vision, there is evidence for a reduction in the integration of sensory features 
in schizophrenia (e.g. increased thresholds for contour detection and motion
coherence). In the context of higher-level vision, comparable differences in the 
integration of sensory features of the face could in theory impair the
recognition of important social cues. Here we examine how the sense of where
other people are looking relies upon the integration of eye-region cues and
head-region cues. Adults with schizophrenia viewed face images designed to elicit
the 'Wollaston illusion', a perceptual phenomenon in which the perceived gaze
direction associated with a given pair of eyes is modulated by the surrounding
sensory context. We performed computational modelling of these psychophysical
data to quantify individual differences in the use of facial cues to gaze
direction. We find that adults with schizophrenia exhibit a robust perceptual
effect whereby their sense of other people's direction of gaze is strongly biased
by sensory cues relating to head orientation in addition to eye region
information. These results indicate that the visual integration of facial cues to
gaze direction in schizophrenia is intact, helping to constrain theories of
reduced integrative processing in higher-level and lower-level vision. In
addition, robust gaze processing was evident in the tested participants despite
reduced performance on a theory of mind task designed to assess higher-level
social cognition.

DOI: 10.1098/rsos.180885 
PMCID: PMC6304143
PMID: 30662721 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests.


191. BMJ Open. 2019 Jan 17;9(1):e021142. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-021142.

Symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder and depression among Eritrean refugees
in Ethiopia: identifying direct, meditating and moderating predictors from path
analysis.

Getnet B(1)(2), Medhin G(3), Alem A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, College of Health Sciences, Addis Ababa University, 
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia.
(3)Aklilu Lemma Institute of Pathobiology, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed at testing the significance of mediating and
moderating roles of sense of coherence, adaptive coping styles and social support
in the relationship between exposure to trauma and psychological symptoms in a
refugee population in sub-Saharan Africa.
METHODS: A cross-sectional survey design was employed to collect data. The study 
was carried out in Mai Aini refugee camp in Ethiopia. A total of 562 adult
Eritrean refugees aged 18-74 years were selected randomly to screen for
depression and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms and to examine
associated factors. Data were collected using the premigration and postmigration 
living difficulties checklist, Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression
(CES-D) scale, Primary Care PTSD Screener, coping style scale, Sense of Coherence
scale and Oslo Social Support scale. Path modelling was used to test the
mediation and moderation effects of prespecified factors.
RESULTS: Premigration living difficulties were associated directly with symptoms 
of PTSD (β=0.09, p<0.05), and associated indirectly with PTSD symptoms in paths
through duration of stay in the camp, sense of coherence, postmigration living
difficulties, task-oriented coping style and depressive symptoms (β=0.26,
p<0.01). Premigration and postmigration living difficulties were associated
directly with depressive symptoms with standardised estimate of β=0.35(p<0.001)
and β=0.23(p<0.05), respectively. Postmigration living difficulties were
associated indirectly with PTSD through paths of sense of coherence,
task-oriented coping style and depressive symptoms (β=0.13; p<0.01). Social
support moderated the effect of postmigration living difficulties on depressive
symptoms (p<0.05). Emotion-oriented coping style moderated the effect of
premigration threat for abuse on PTSD (β=-0.18, p<0.001) and depressive (β=-0.12,
p<0.01) symptoms, as well as moderating threat to life on PTSD symptoms (β=-0.13,
p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Sense of coherence and task-oriented coping style showed a partial
mediating effect on the association between exposure to trauma and symptoms of
PTSD. An emotion-oriented coping style and social support moderated the effect of
premigration and postmigration living difficulties, respectively. Fostering
social support, task-oriented and emotion-oriented coping styles may be
beneficial for these refugees.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-021142 
PMCID: PMC6340455
PMID: 30659034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


192. J Psychosom Res. 2019 Jan;116:83-92. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2018.12.001. Epub 
2018 Dec 5.

Illness perception in people with primary and secondary chronic headache in the
general population.

Kristoffersen ES(1), Lundqvist C(2), Russell MB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Head and Neck Research Group, Research Centre, Akershus University Hospital,
Lørenskog, Norway; Department of General Practice, Institute of Health and
Society, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Electronic address:
e.s.kristoffersen@medisin.uio.no.
(2)Head and Neck Research Group, Research Centre, Akershus University Hospital,
Lørenskog, Norway; Institute of Clinical Medicine, Campus Akershus University
Hospital, University of Oslo, Nordbyhagen, Norway; HØKH, Research Centre,
Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway; Department of Neurology,
Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway.
(3)Head and Neck Research Group, Research Centre, Akershus University Hospital,
Lørenskog, Norway; Institute of Clinical Medicine, Campus Akershus University
Hospital, University of Oslo, Nordbyhagen, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Chronic headache (headache ≥15 days/month) is a leading cause of
disability. Illness perception, beliefs and cognitive models are likely central
for patient understanding of their chronic pain condition and are associated with
treatment outcome. However, these factors are insufficiently described in chronic
headache.
OBJECTIVE: To describe illness perception, and to explore the effect of
background variables and headache characteristics on illness perceptions in
primary and secondary chronic headaches in the general population.
METHODS: 30,000 persons aged 3044 from the general population were screened for
chronic headache by a mailed questionnaire. Those with self-reported chronic
headache were interviewed by headache specialists. The questionnaire response
rate was 71%, and the interview participation rate was 74%. The International
Classification of Headache Disorders III was applied. Illness perception was
assessed by the Revised Illness Perception Questionnaire (IPQ-R). The statistical
approach was exploratory.
RESULTS: 405 of the 516 eligible participants (78%) completed the IPQ-R.
Confirmatory factor analysis showed good internal validity in chronic headache.
People believed their chronic headache to be long-lasting, with negative life
consequences including emotional distress. Severe headache-related disability was
associated with more perception of chronicity, more perceived consequences,
emotional load and illness identity and less illness coherence. People with
secondary chronic headache scored significantly higher on chronicity and life
consequences, and had less personal control than those with primary chronic
headache.
CONCLUSION: Chronic primary and secondary headache is associated with a high
symptom burden and chronicity with large perceived negative consequences for
daily living, suggesting multidisciplinary management may be necessary.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2018.12.001 
PMID: 30654999  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Menopause. 2019 Jul;26(7):758-764. doi: 10.1097/GME.0000000000001299.

Relationships between menopausal symptoms, sense of coherence, coping strategies,
and quality of life.

Ngai FW(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong.

OBJECTIVES: The aims of this study were to examine the relationships between
menopausal symptoms, sense of coherence (SOC), coping strategies, and quality of 
life, and to test the mediating effects of SOC and coping strategies on the
relationships between menopausal symptoms and quality of life among Chinese women
during menopausal transition.
METHODS: Two hundred one women aged 40 to 60 years and currently undergoing
menopausal transition were recruited at community centers between June and August
2017. Menopausal symptoms, SOC, coping strategies, and quality of life were
assessed by the Menopause Rating Scale, the Sense of Coherence Scale, the Brief
COPE Inventory, and the Medical Outcomes Study Short-Form-36, respectively. Data 
were analyzed by path analysis.
RESULTS: Menopausal symptoms were associated with poorer quality of life, and
both SOC and maladaptive coping were found to mediate the effects of menopausal
symptoms on quality of life. The results suggest that SOC might alleviate the
adverse effects of menopausal symptoms on quality of life, whereas maladaptive
coping strategies might aggravate the adverse effects of menopausal symptoms on
quality of life.
CONCLUSIONS: The results provide new insights into the importance of considering 
SOC and coping strategies and their interactions with menopausal symptoms and
quality of life in the situation of menopausal transition.

DOI: 10.1097/GME.0000000000001299 
PMID: 30649086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Reumatologia. 2018;56(6):368-376. doi: 10.5114/reum.2018.80714. Epub 2018 Dec 23.

Evaluation of coping with chronic rheumatic disease, in the context of
socio-demographic factors and disease duration, based on the example of patients 
with ankylosing spondylitis.

Piekutin A(1), Sierakowska M(2), Doroszkiewicz H(3), Krajewska-Kułak E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care, Medical University of
Białystok, Poland.
(2)Department of Integrated Medical Care, Medical University of Białystok,
Poland.
(3)Department of Geriatrics, Medical University of Białystok, Poland.

Objectives: Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) impairs patients' functioning, reducing
their quality of life. The author of salutogenesis, Antonovsky, claims that
maintaining an inner balance in a chronic disease is possible through a high
sense of coherence. The aim of the current study was to identify
socio-demographic factors and disease duration related to the feeling of
coherence of patients with AS, acceptance of disease and risk of depression.
Material and methods: The study was conducted on 82 patients with diagnosed AS.
The research method was a diagnostic survey using the Life Orientation
Questionnaire (SOC-29), Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) and Acceptance of Illness
Scale (AIS).
Results: In the study, the majority of the patients were male (89%), aged 42
(±11.3). The average duration of AS is 13 (±7.8) years. It was reported that with
age, illness acceptance got worse (rp = -0.567, p < 0.0001), and the risk of
depressive disorders increased (rp = 0.648, p < 0.0001). The longer the patient
suffered from AS, the weaker was their illness acceptance (rp = -0.446, p <
0.0001) and sense of coherence (rp = -0.448, p < 0.001) whereas the risk of
depressive disorder increased (rp = 0.479, p < 0.0001). A high linear correlation
between illness acceptance and sense of coherence (rp = 0.638, p < 0.0001) and a 
very high negative correlation between overall sense of coherence and risk of
depression (rp = -0.857, p < 0.0001) were observed.
Conclusions: Patients with low sense of coherence demonstrated poorer adaptation 
to the illness and a greater risk of depressive disorders. Factors lowering the
sense of coherence and illness acceptance and increasing risk of depression in
the studied patients with AS were progressing illness, older age and lower
education level.

DOI: 10.5114/reum.2018.80714 
PMCID: PMC6330684
PMID: 30647483 

Conflict of interest statement: This work has been financially supported by
Medical University of Białystok, Poland. The authors declare no conflict of
interest.


195. Diabetes Metab Syndr. 2019 Jan - Feb;13(1):18-23. doi: 10.1016/j.dsx.2018.08.004.
Epub 2018 Aug 2.

Chronic stress, sense of coherence and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Madhu SV(1), Siddiqui A(2), Desai NG(3), Sharma SB(4), Bansal AK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of
Endocrinology, University College of Medical Sciences, University of Delhi,
Delhi, 110095, India. Electronic address: drsvmadhu@gmail.com.
(2)Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of
Endocrinology, University College of Medical Sciences, University of Delhi,
Delhi, 110095, India.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Institute of Human Behaviour and Allied Sciences,
Delhi, 110095, India.
(4)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University College of Medical Sciences,
University of Delhi, Delhi, 110095, India.
(5)Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, University College of
Medical Sciences, University of Delhi, Delhi, 110095, India.

AIMS: The study was conducted to ascertain whether chronic stress and sense of
coherence are associated with risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: Stress questionnaires - Presumptive Stressful Life Events Scale (PSLES),
Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) and Sense of Coherence (SOC) - were administered to 
500 Newly Detected Diabetes Mellitus (NDDM) cases and 500 Normal Glucose
Tolerance (NGT) controls recruited following 75 g OGTT. Assessment of stress was 
completed before the diagnosis of diabetes was revealed to them.
RESULTS: PSLES and PSS scores were significantly higher and SOC score was
significantly lower in NDDM subjects compared to those with NGT. PSLES and PSS
correlated positively with anthropometric parameters (waist circumference, BMI), 
glycemic parameters (FPG, 2 hPG, A1C) and HOMA-IR and inversely with HOMA-β
whereas SOC correlated inversely with glycemic parameters (FPG, 2 hPG, A1C) and
HOMA-IR and positively with HOMA-β. In stepwise logistic regression analysis, SOC
emerged as the strongest independent predictor of diabetes (OR: 0.774) after
HOMA-IR (OR: 1.621) and BMI (OR: 1.288). Other significant predictors included
PSS (OR:1.153), PSLES-LT (OR: 1.005) and HOMA-β (OR: 0.894).
CONCLUSION: Chronic stress and low sense of coherence are associated with a
higher risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Copyright © 2018 Diabetes India. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dsx.2018.08.004 
PMID: 30641693  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2019 Jul - Aug;59:78-79. doi:
10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2018.12.001. Epub 2018 Dec 6.

Alexithymia and sense of coherence: Does their impact on fibromyalgia suggest new
targets for therapy?

Sancassiani F(1), Preti A(2), Cacace E(2), Ruggiero V(2), Testa G(2), Romano
F(3), Carta MG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health, University of Cagliari,
Italy. Electronic address: federicasancassiani@yahoo.it.
(2)Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health, University of Cagliari,
Italy.
(3)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, University of Rome "La
Sapienza", Italy.

DOI: 10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2018.12.001 
PMID: 30638611  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Disabil Rehabil. 2020 Apr;42(8):1141-1152. doi: 10.1080/09638288.2018.1517195.
Epub 2019 Jan 11.

Living well with chronic pain: a classical grounded theory.

Lennox Thompson B(1), Gage J(2), Kirk R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery & Musculoskeletal Medicine, University of
Otago, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(2)College of Nursing, California Baptist University, Riverside, CA, USA.
(3)UC Health, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.

Purpose: There is little theory to explain how and why some people cope well
despite chronic pain. This study proposes a mid-level theoretical explanation for
those that cope well, shedding light on factors relevant to acceptance.Method:
Classical grounded theory methodology was closely followed to generate a theory
grounded in data obtained from community-dwelling people self-identified as
living well despite chronic pain.Results: The main concern of people experiencing
chronic pain is resolving the problem of disrupted self-coherence. Resolution
involves re-occupying self by (1) making sense of pain using an idiographic
model; (2) deciding to turn from patient to person, facilitated or hindered by
interactions with clinicians and occupational drive; and (3) flexibly persisting,
where occupational engaging and coping allow individuals to develop future
plans.Conclusions: This theory demonstrates the importance of engaging in
occupation during rehabilitation by framing chronic pain adjustment within a
process of renegotiating the self-concept. Occupations allow individuals to
express values important to their sense of self. Coping strategies are used to
enable occupation and are judged by their workability in this context. When
developing goals and plans with people living with pain, rehabilitation
professionals should consider an individual's position within the processes
involved in learning to live well.Implication for rehabilitationLiving well with 
chronic pain involves a process of making sense, deciding to move on with life,
and flexibly persisting.Diagnosis should be accompanied by messages about hurt
and harm not being equivalent, and the need for a lifelong approach to managing a
chronic problem.An idiographic depiction or formulation of a person's pain and
disability provides opportunities for making sense of symptoms and collaborating 
on treatment goals.Remaining supportive, providing "small acts" demonstrating
that the person is unique and being thought of, and encouraging engagement in
valued occupations allows patients to experiment with, and start to engage in
what is important in their lives.Clinicians should help people extend their
coping repertoire and encourage flexibility with how these are applied in the
pursuit of valued occupations.The positive motivation that comes from individuals
identifying highly valued occupations is an aspect that all clinicians, but
particularly occupational therapists, should recognize.

DOI: 10.1080/09638288.2018.1517195 
PMID: 30634865  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Issues Ment Health Nurs. 2019 Jan;40(1):73-78. doi:
10.1080/01612840.2018.1437856. Epub 2019 Jan 11.

Loneliness, Stress, and Depressive Symptoms Among the Chinese Rural Empty Nest
Elderly: A Moderated Mediation Analysis.

Huang LJ MM, RN(1), Du WT MM, RN(2), Liu YC MM, RN(3), Guo LN PhD, LPN(4), Zhang 
JJ BS, RN(5), Qin MM BS, RN(6), Liu K MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)a College of Nursing , Jinzhou Medical University , Jinzhou , Liaoning , PR
China.
(2)b Department of Cardiology , the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University , Zhengzhou , Henan , PR China.
(3)c Department of Nephrology(1) , Affiliated Hospital of Jining Medical
University , Jining , Shandong , PR China.
(4)d Department of Neurology , the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University , Zhengzhou , Henan , PR China.
(5)e Department of Neurology(1) , the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University , Zhengzhou , Henan , PR China.
(6)f Department of Operating theatre(2) , the First Affiliated Hospital of
Zhengzhou University , Zhengzhou , Henan , PR China.

This study aimed to explore the relationship of loneliness, perceived stress, and
depressive symptoms among the Chinese rural empty nest elderly. The role of sense
of coherence (SOC) as a moderating variable was investigated in a representative 
sample of older adults in Henan, China, from November 2016 to February 2017.
Results indicated that perceived stress mediated the relationship between
loneliness and depressive symptoms, and SOC acted as a moderator on this
mediating model. The mediation effect of perceived stress was significant only
when SOC was lower. The results emphasized the importance of perceived stress in 
older adults. SOC was a protective factor with regard to depressive symptoms, and
improving SOC should be a focus of health promotion with the elderly.

DOI: 10.1080/01612840.2018.1437856 
PMID: 30633625  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Pers Soc Psychol. 2020 Apr;118(4):864-884. doi: 10.1037/pspp0000225. Epub 2019 
Jan 7.

Meaning is about mattering: Evaluating coherence, purpose, and existential
mattering as precursors of meaning in life judgments.

Costin V(1), Vignoles VL(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, University of Sussex.

When people judge their lives as meaningful, what is this judgment about? Drawing
on recent tripartite theoretical accounts of meaning in life (MIL), we tested the
separate contributions of coherence (or comprehension), purpose, and existential 
mattering (or significance) as potential precursors of people's self-reported
evaluations of MIL. In Study 1 (N = 314 social media users), we developed brief
acquiescence-free measures of these constructs, confirming that sense of
coherence, purpose, mattering, and MIL judgments were distinct from each other
and from related constructs (sense of control, belonging, self-esteem,
self-competence, mood). In Study 2 (N = 168 students) and Study 3 (N = 442
Prolific Academic respondents; preregistered), we collected longitudinal data to 
test temporal relationships between coherence, purpose, mattering, and MIL
judgments over a 1-month time lag. In both studies, sense of mattering
consistently emerged as a significant precursor of MIL judgments, whereas sense
of purpose and coherence did not. We conclude that researchers and practitioners 
should pay more attention to the relatively neglected dimension of existential
mattering, beyond their more common emphases on coherence or purpose as bases of 
meaningfulness. (PsycINFO Database Record (c) 2020 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/pspp0000225 
PMID: 30614732  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Community Ment Health J. 2019 May;55(4):721-731. doi: 10.1007/s10597-018-0362-5. 
Epub 2019 Jan 2.

National Resilience: A New Self-Report Assessment Scale.

Kimhi S(1), Eshel Y(2)(3), Lahad M(4)(5), Leykin D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Tel Hai College, 12210, Tel Hai, Israel.
shaulkim@telhai.ac.il.
(2)Department of Psychology, Tel Hai College, 12210, Tel Hai, Israel.
(3)University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
(4)Department of Psychology and Drama Therapy, Tel Hai College, Tel Hai, Israel.
(5)Community Stress Prevention Center, Kiryat Shemona, Israel.
(6)Recanati School for Community Health Professions, Department of Emergency
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, PREPARED Center for Emergency Response
Research, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel.

The current paper presents a new self-report national resilience assessment scale
(NRAS). The scale was constructed and validated using a sample of 1022 Jewish
Israeli adults. The internal structure of the 25-item was determined by a Varimax
factor analysis, which emitted four distinct factors pertaining to identifying
with the state, solidarity and social justice, trust in national institutions and
trust in public justice; which explained 61% of the variance. These factor scores
were validated against two national resilience promoting factors (community
resilience and sense of coherence), and two national resilience suppressing
factors (distress symptoms and sense of danger); as well as four demographic
characteristics (level of religiosity, political attitudes, income and level of
exposure to terror/ war experiences in the last year). Results supported the
validity of the NRAS and its four components, showing that it was consistently
correlated with resilience promoting and resilience suppressing factors.

DOI: 10.1007/s10597-018-0362-5 
PMID: 30600401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Women Birth. 2019 Dec;32(6):e515-e522. doi: 10.1016/j.wombi.2018.12.011. Epub
2018 Dec 29.

"I want a birth without interventions": Women's childbirth experiences from
Turkey.

Deliktas Demirci A(1), Kabukcuglu K(2), Haugan G(3), Aune I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Akdeniz University, Faculty of Nursing, Department of Obstetrics &
Gynaecological Nursing, Antalya, Turkey. Electronic address:
aysedeliktas@akdeniz.edu.tr.
(2)Akdeniz University, Faculty of Nursing, Department of Obstetrics &
Gynaecological Nursing, Antalya, Turkey.
(3)Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Department of Public Health and Nursing, Trondheim, Norway.
(4)Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Department of Public Health and Nursing, Midwifery Education,
Trondheim, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Although primarily stemming from research conducted in high-income
countries, culturally sensitive knowledge of women's experiences with and needs
during childbirth, as well as how such experiences affect their psychological
health and wellbeing, is important to add to the big picture of women's
experiences with childbirth worldwide.
AIM: The aim of the study was to clarify how primiparous women in Turkey
experience childbirth and intrapartum care.
METHODS: Grounded theory guided depth-interviews with 12 women, whose data were
analysed according to the constant comparative method.
FINDINGS: Participants reported wanting vaginal birth without interventions (i.e.
normal birth), which required their empowerment as well as support from others.
Although they recognised their readiness for the birth process as a decisive
factor in coping with childbirth, they prioritised quality of care from
healthcare professionals during birth, which most participants found
unsatisfactory. They also highlighted the importance of giving birth in a
health-promoting environment offering privacy, silence and comfort.
DISCUSSION: To support normal birth, the World Health Organization's intrapartum 
care model prioritises continuity of care, respectful labour and childbirth care,
effective communication from healthcare personnel and emotional support from a
companion of choice. Salutogenesis can also guide clinical birth practices to
promote normal birth and positive birth experiences.
CONCLUSION: All women strove to experience normal birth, which required antenatal
education and emotional support from a partner or family and from healthcare
professionals. Normal birth and positive childbirth experiences also required
quality intrapartum care and a health-promoting environment.

Copyright © 2018 Australian College of Midwives. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wombi.2018.12.011 
PMID: 30600167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


202. PLoS One. 2018 Dec 31;13(12):e0209550. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209550.
eCollection 2018.

Evaluation of the revised sense of coherence scale in a representative German
sample.

Thoma MV(1)(2), Mc Gee SL(1)(2), Fegert JM(3), Glaesmer H(4), Brähler E(5),
Maercker A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Psychopathology and Clinical Intervention, Institute of Psychology, University
of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)University Research Priority Program "Dynamics of Healthy Aging", University
of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of
Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(4)Department of Medical Psychology and Medical Sociology, University of Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University Medical
Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the Revised Sense of Coherence (SOC-R)
scale in a large representative German sample.
DESIGN: A nationwide household survey involving a total of 2510 face-to-face
interviews.
METHODS: In addition to the SOC-R, childhood trauma and maltreatment (CTM),
lifetime traumatic events (Childhood Trauma Questionnaire, CTQ, and the Life
Events Checklist for DSM-5, LEC-5), and mental health (Patient Health
Questionnaire, PHQ-4) were assessed.
RESULTS: The final sample consisted of N = 2373 participants (52.3% females; M = 
48.24 years). Confirmatory factor analyses confirmed a three-factor structure for
the SOC-R ('manageability', 'balance', 'reflection') with acceptable indices
(RMSEA .066; 90% CI [.062, .071]). Reliability analyses revealed good internal
consistency (α = .87). Construct validity was supported by significant but low
correlations with psychopathology. Gender marginally influenced SOC-R (t = 1.99, 
p = .05). Moderation analyses revealed that SOC-R exerted a protective impact on 
depression in the context of CTQ (t = 2.29, p < .05) and lifetime traumatic
events (t = -2.37, p < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: This study supports the psychometric properties of the SOC-R and
emphasizes the importance of considering salutogenic effects to better understand
interindividual differences in the effect of adversity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209550 
PMCID: PMC6312289
PMID: 30596688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


203. J Educ Health Promot. 2018 Nov 27;7:143. doi: 10.4103/jehp.jehp_179_17.
eCollection 2018.

The comparison of fear of childbirth and sense of coherence among low-risk and
high-risk pregnancy women.

Mohamamdirizi S(1), Mohamadirizi M(2), Mohamadirizi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nursing and Midwifery Care Research Center, Nursing and Midwifery School,
Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(2)Departement of Human Resource Management, Dehaghan Branch, Azad University,
Dehaghan, Iran.

INTRODUCTION: Childbirth fear is one of the major problems during pregnancy and
postpartum, and it assesses the sense of management coherence in stress.
Therefore, the present study was conducted to compare the association between the
sense of coherence and childbirth fear in high-risk and low-risk pregnant women.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was a cross-sectional correlation study performed on 
440 low-risk and high-risk pregnant women referred to health centers in Isfahan
in 2016. Sampling was carried out in several stages and clustered and accessible.
The data gathering tool was Sense of Coherence and Fear of Childbirth
Questionnaires.
RESULTS: The results showed that in high-risk pregnant women, the mean score of
the sense of coherence was 108.23 and the fear of delivery was 41.7, and in
low-risk pregnant women, the sense of integrity and fear of delivery were 19.109 
and 42.25, respectively. In addition, the results of t-test showed that there is 
no significant relationship between the fear of delivery in high-risk and
low-risk pregnant women (P = 0.056), while there is a significant relationship
between sense of coherence score in high-risk and low-risk pregnant women (P =
0.02).
CONCLUSION: Having the desired level of success, happiness, well-being, ability
to cope with stress and overcoming psychological crisis, and pleasant social
relationships can increase the sense of coherence in pregnant mothers.

DOI: 10.4103/jehp.jehp_179_17 
PMCID: PMC6282476
PMID: 30596115 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


204. Ment Illn. 2019;11(2):20-24. doi: 10.1108/MIJ-10-2019-0001. Epub 2019 Nov 4.

Effects of nature-based mindfulness training on resilience/symptom load in
professionals with high work-related stress-levels: findings from the WIN-Study.

Lücke C(1), Braumandl S(2), Becker B(3), Moeller S(1), Custal C(4), Philipsen
A(1), Müller HHO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn,
Germany.
(2)GrenZENlos - Naturseminare, Neukirchen vorm Wald, Germany.
(3)Comes Unternehmensberatung, Oldenburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Friedrich-Alexander University
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Nuremberg, Germany.

Purpose: The levels of work-related stress and the incidence rates of subsequent 
related illnesses are increasing in our society, leading to high individual and
socioeconomic burdens. Mindfulness training has been shown to be an effective
method of improving stress resilience. This paper aims to investigate the
efficacy of nature-based mindfulness training in professionals with high levels
of work-related stress.
Design/methodology/approach: In this controlled pilot study, a total of 56
volunteers completed a nature-based mindfulness training progam and were compared
to 8 participants (waitlist controls). Psychometric assessments were performed at
baseline and after two and four months of training.
Findings: After two months of training, the scores for self-efficacy, sense of
coherence, level of mindfulness and overall psychiatric symptom load had
significantly improved in the intervention group, while the control group did not
show any significant improvements. A comparison between the intervention and
control groups showed a significant difference regarding the sense of coherence
only.
Research limitations/implications: Since this was an exploratory study with a
small control group, further studies are needed to verify our findings.
Practical implications: In conclusion, nature-based mindfulness training seems to
be a promising tool for the improvement of resilience and overall psychological
health in professionals.
Originality/value: This was the first study to systematically investigate effects
of nature-based mindfulness training in people with high work-related stress.

© Caroline Lücke, Sylvia Braumandl, Bernhard Becker, Sebastian Moeller, Christina
Custal, Alexandra Philipsen and Helge H.O. Müller.

DOI: 10.1108/MIJ-10-2019-0001 
PMCID: PMC7364569
PMID: 32742622 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: All authors report that
they have no conflicts of interest.


205. BMC Health Serv Res. 2018 Dec 29;18(1):1012. doi: 10.1186/s12913-018-3843-x.

Twelve-month effect of chronic pain self-management intervention delivered in an 
easily accessible primary healthcare service - a randomised controlled trial.

Nøst TH(1)(2), Steinsbekk A(3), Bratås O(3)(4), Grønning K(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Nursing, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Postbox 8905, 7491, Trondheim, Norway. torunn.h.nost@ntnu.no.
(2)Center for Health Promotion Research, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Trondheim, Norway. torunn.h.nost@ntnu.no.
(3)Department of Public Health and Nursing, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Postbox 8905, 7491, Trondheim, Norway.
(4)Center for Health Promotion Research, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Trondheim, Norway.

BACKGROUND: To investigate the effects after twelve months related to patient
activation and a range of secondary outcomes on persons with chronic pain of a
chronic pain self-management course compared to a low-impact outdoor physical
activity, delivered in an easily accessible healthcare service in public primary 
care.
METHODS: An open, pragmatic, parallel group randomised controlled trial was
conducted. The intervention group was offered a group-based chronic pain
self-management course with 2.5-h weekly sessions for a period of six weeks
comprising education that included cognitive and behavioural strategies for pain 
management, movement exercises, group discussions and sharing of experiences
among participants. The control group was offered a drop-in, low-impact, outdoor 
physical activity in groups in one-hour weekly sessions that included walking and
simple strength exercises for a period of six weeks. The primary outcome was
patient activation assessed using the Patient Activation Measure (PAM-13).
Secondary outcomes included assessments of pain, anxiety and depression, pain
self-efficacy, sense of coherence, health-related quality of life, well-being and
the 30-s Chair to Stand Test. Analyses were performed using a linear mixed model.
RESULTS: After twelve months, there were no statistically significant differences
between the intervention group (n = 60) and the control group (n = 61) for the
primary or the secondary outcomes. The estimated mean difference between the
groups for the primary outcome PAM was 4.0 (CI 95% -0.6 to 8.6, p = 0.085).
Within both of the groups, there were statistically significant improvements in
pain experienced during the previous week, the global self-rated health measure
and the 30-s Chair to Stand Test.
CONCLUSIONS: No long-term effect of the chronic pain self-management course was
found in comparison with a low-impact physical activity intervention for the
primary outcome patient activation or for any secondary outcome.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT02531282 . Registered on August
212,015.

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-018-3843-x 
PMCID: PMC6310959
PMID: 30594190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Oral Dis. 2019 Apr;25(3):881-887. doi: 10.1111/odi.13027. Epub 2019 Jan 16.

Sense of Coherence mediates the association between temporomandibular disorders
and quality of life.

Luz FWM(1), Perroni AP(1), Nascimento GG(2), Goettems ML(1), Boscato N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Dentistry, School of Dentistry, Federal University of
Pelotas, Pelotas, Brazil.
(2)Section of Periodontology, Department of Dentistry and Oral Health, Aarhus
University, Aarhus, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate whether sense of coherence (SOC) mediates
the association between temporomandibular disorders (TMD) and oral health-related
quality of life (OHRQoL) and general quality of life (QoL) in Brazilian elders.
METHODS: Informations on sociodemographic, psychological, and presence or absence
of temporomandibular disorders (TMD) were collected by trained dentists among
non-institutionalized elders (n = 110). OHRQoL was measured with the Oral Health 
Impact Profile (OHIP-14) and QoL using the WHOQOL-BREF. Structural equation
modeling (SEM) was used to estimate the standardized direct effect of TMD on
OHRQoL and on QoL, and the indirect effect mediated by SOC.
RESULTS: Temporomandibular disorders had no direct effect on OHRQoL (coef.
-0.10), whereas indirect effect mediated by SOC was noted (coef. 0.35). Regarding
QoL, the indirect effect of TMD, mediated by SOC, on QoL (coef. 0.58) was higher 
than the direct effect (coef. 0.34).
CONCLUSION: Sense of coherence mediated the effect of TMD on oral and general
quality of life among elders.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/odi.13027 
PMID: 30592352  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Int J Psychol. 2018 Dec;53 Suppl 2:64-71. doi: 10.1002/ijop.12547.

Using arts-based research to access sense of coherence in marginalised indigenous
Bedouin youth.

Huss E(1), Braun-Lewensohn O(2), Ganayiem H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Chair: Arts in Social Work Masters Specialisation, Charlotte B. and Jack J.
Spitzer Department of Social Work, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev,
Beer-Sheva, Israel.
(2)Conflict Management & Conflict Resolution Program, Ben-Gurion University of
the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel.
(3)Education Department, Alksom Regional Council, Israel.

The literature describes a mismatch between the core concepts of salutogenesis,
or sense of coherence (SOC), meaning manageability and comprehensibility, as
these concepts are manifested in research with Western populations, as compared
to non-Western populations. The overall objective of this study is to explore
this mismatch and to understand how the core concept of salutogenesis is
manifested in youth ages 14-16 from the indigenous Bedouin ethnic minority
culture of the Negev, Israel, in their own terms through arts-based qualitative
methods. The research methods revolved 80 drawings and texts by youth who drew "a
good day that went bad - and how [I] fixed it" as well as focus groups. All data,
both verbal and visual, were analysed by dividing into themes and then socially
contextualising the themes with a peer group. The findings reveal and concretize 
a mismatch in SOC between these youth and the predominant Western understandings 
of coping in terms of meanings, manageability and comprehensibility of coping
methods. This study's theoretical recommendations are the need to take steps in
the direction of closing the gap or mismatch between a universal versus
culturally specific body of literature about culture and SOC. Its practical
recommendations are to suggest such a methodology.

© 2018 International Union of Psychological Science.

DOI: 10.1002/ijop.12547 
PMID: 30588621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Asian Bioeth Rev. 2018 Dec 27;10(4):313-332. doi: 10.1007/s41649-018-0072-x.
eCollection 2018 Dec.

From a variety of ethics to the integrity and congruence of research on
biodiversity conservation.

Lajaunie C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)French National Institute of Health and Medical Research INSERM, Regional
Office Provence Alpes Côte d'Azur et Corse, Marseille, France.
(2)Strathclyde Centre for Environmental Law and Governance (SCELG), Law School,
Strathclyde University, Glasgow, Scotland.

This article aims to find the elements that are required for a common ethical
approach that is suitable for the different perspectives adopted in integrative
biodiversity conservation research. A general reflection on the integrity of
research is a priority worldwide, with a common aim to promote good research
practice. Beyond the relationship between researcher and research subject, the
integrity of research is considered in a broader perspective which entails
scientific integrity towards society. In research involving a variety of
disciplines and a diversity of legal and ethical frameworks, there is a need of
harmony between different sets of values. The notion of congruence (or more
pragmatically, alignment) reflects the consistency of ethics in research within
the biodiversity conservation's community of researchers. It also bears on the
coherence of values shared between the scientific community and society. We
examine the notion of research integrity in a broad sense. This examination is to
be conducted in relation to the goal of protecting ecological integrity, which is
at the core of biodiversity conservation. The notion of integrity constraints
should be investigated further to develop a pragmatic response to the need for
integrity and congruence in research for biodiversity conservation.

© National University of Singapore and Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018.

DOI: 10.1007/s41649-018-0072-x 
PMCID: PMC7747400
PMID: 33717295 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interestThe authors’ declare that
they have no conflict of interest.


209. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2019 Jan;207(1):34-37. doi: 10.1097/NMD.0000000000000922.

Relationships Between Meaning in Life, Dispositional Mindfulness, Perceived
Stress, and Psychological Symptoms Among Chinese Patients With Gastrointestinal
Cancer.

Zhong M(1), Zhang Q(2), Bao J(3), Xu W(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, P.R. China.
(2)University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(3)People's Armed College, Nanjing Normal University, P.R. China.

This research examined the degree to which meaning in life explained the
association between dispositional mindfulness and psychological symptoms. This
was a survey research study with 292 patients with gastrointestinal cancer.
Meaning in Life, dispositional mindfulness, psychological symptoms, and perceived
stress were assessed. Results showed that consistent with theory and prior
research, greater dispositional mindfulness was associated with less
psychological symptoms and perceived stress. In addition, the results of the
structural equation model verify that meaning in life mediates the association
between dispositional mindfulness and perceived stress and psychological
symptoms. Findings are consistent with logotheory and suggest that psychological 
symptoms may be reduced by addressing the impact of meaning in life.

DOI: 10.1097/NMD.0000000000000922 
PMID: 30575706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Scand J Caring Sci. 2019 Jun;33(2):436-445. doi: 10.1111/scs.12641. Epub 2018 Dec
21.

Lifestyle factors, self-reported health and sense of coherence among
fathers/partners in relation to risk for depression and anxiety in early
pregnancy.

Finnbogadóttir H(1), Persson EK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health and Society, Department of Care Science, Malmö University,
Malmö, Sweden.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, Medical Faculty, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Father's health is important for mothers and unborn/newborn children 
and knowledge about expectant fathers' health in relation to lifestyle and
psychosocial aspects is essential.
AIMS: To determine sociodemographic and lifestyle factors, self-reported health
and sense of coherence among fathers and partners in relation to their risk for
depression and anxiety in early pregnancy.
METHODS: A cross-sectional design, descriptive statistics, chi-squared analysis, 
T-test, binary logistic regression, multiple logistic regression with OR and 95% 
CI were used.
RESULTS: A total of 532 prospective fathers/partners constituted the cohort (mean
age 31.55, SD 5.47 years). Nearly, one in ten (9.8%) had a statistically high
risk for depression; mainly those who were unemployed (p = 0.043), had financial 
distress (0.001), reported 'very or fairly bad' health (p = 0.002), had a 'very
or fairly bad' sexual satisfaction (p = 0.006) and scored low on the SOC scale
(p < 0.001). They smoked more often (p = 0.003) were hazardous users of alcohol
(p = 0.001) and slept with difficulties (p = 0.001). Those with sleeping
difficulties were 5.7 times more likely to have several symptoms of depression
(p = 0.001). Hazardous users of alcohol and smokers had 3.1 respectively 3.0
times higher risk for depression (p = 0.001 respectively 0.003). The single
strongest risk factor was a low score on the SOC-scale which gave 10.6 (AOR 10.6;
95% CI 5.4-20.6) higher risk for depression. High-anxiety 'just now' was reported
by 8.9% and 'in general' by 7.9%, and those who had sleeping difficulties
reported 'very or fairly bad' health (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Allocating more resources and introducing more family-focused care
with depression and anxiety screening in early pregnancy for both expecting
parents at antenatal care should be strongly considered by actors and
policymakers, as this is a step in maintaining a family's well-being.

© 2018 Nordic College of Caring Science.

DOI: 10.1111/scs.12641 
PMID: 30575068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Front Psychol. 2018 Dec 4;9:2344. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02344. eCollection
2018.

Salutogenic Affordances and Sustainability: Multiple Benefits With Edible Forest 
Gardens in Urban Green Spaces.

Stoltz J(1), Schaffer C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Geography, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.

With increased urbanization, ecological challenges such as climate change and
loss of biodiversity, and stress-related disorders globally posing a major threat
to public health and wellbeing, the development of efficient multiple-use
strategies for urban green spaces and infrastructures is of great importance. In 
addition to benefits such as climate and water regulation, food production, and
biodiversity conservation, green spaces and features have been associated with
various health and wellbeing outcomes from a psychological perspective. Research 
suggests links between exposure to green environmental qualities and restoration 
from psycho-physiological stress and attention fatigue, promotion of physical
activity, increased neighborhood satisfaction and even reduced mortality.
Especially strong associations have been observed in urban and socio-economically
challenged areas. Usually such salutogenic, i.e., health-promoting, effects are
explained through theories related to the notion of biophilia, i.e., the idea
that humans share innate tendencies to attend to natural environments and
features that have been beneficial during evolution. This paper assumes an
ecological approach to perception and behavior to be fruitful in order to analyze
the salutogenic potential of environments such as urban green spaces and to step 
beyond the "green vs. gray" dichotomy that has been prevalent through much of the
research on health-promoting environments. Through an analysis of environmental
affordances for certain perceived qualities such an approach is explored through 
a proposed concept for urban green space use and management, the edible forest
garden. Such gardens, based on agroecological principles, have emerged as one of 
the most promising models regarding ecologically sustainable food production. In 
addition to potential contributions of importance for urban sustainability and
biodiversity, we argue that the inclusion of edible forest gardens in urban green
spaces - today globally dominated by lawns - also potentially could reinforce
several affordances of salutogenic importance, both in terms of, e.g., social
cohesion but also in regard to restoration from psycho-physiological stress and
attention fatigue. Increased opportunities for contact with nature and processes 
of food production may also reinforce pro-environmental behaviors in the
population and thus also affect long-term sustainability.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02344 
PMCID: PMC6292239
PMID: 30574105 


212. Psychol Res. 2019 Feb;83(1):185-195. doi: 10.1007/s00426-018-1137-x. Epub 2018
Dec 17.

Do movements contribute to sense of body ownership? Rubber hand illusion in
expert pianists.

Pyasik M(1), Salatino A(2), Pia L(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)SAMBA-SpAtial, Motor and Bodily Awareness Research Group, Department of
Psychology, University of Turin, Via Po 14, 10123, Turin, Italy.
maria.pyasik@unito.it.
(2)SAMBA-SpAtial, Motor and Bodily Awareness Research Group, Department of
Psychology, University of Turin, Via Po 14, 10123, Turin, Italy.
(3)NIT-Neuroscience Institute of Turin, Via Verdi, 8, 10124, Turin, Italy.

Currently, it is still debated whether, how and to what extent movements
contribute to the sense of body ownership (i.e., the feeling that one's body
belongs to oneself). To answer this question, here we examined if a prolonged
increase of the amount of movements affects body ownership. Specifically, we
administered the rubber hand illusion paradigm within a natural condition of
long-term motor practice, namely in expert pianists. We compared the illusory
effects of both static (visuotactile stimulation) and dynamic (active/passive
movements) versions of that paradigm in a group of expert pianists and a group of
non-musicians. The illusion was measured behaviorally (proprioceptive drift) and 
subjectively (questionnaire). Our results showed that pianists were significantly
less susceptible to any type of the illusion, compared to the non-musicians.
Moreover, they did not experience the illusion in general (presenting neither the
proprioceptive drift, nor the subjective feeling of ownership). These findings
suggest that the increased amount of motor-related afferent and efferent signals 
does affect the construction and the coherence of body ownership, thus showing
the role of movements in this process.

DOI: 10.1007/s00426-018-1137-x 
PMID: 30560294  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2018 Dec 19;90:e1-e4.

[Salutogenesis and community self-care: also a nurse responsibility].

[Article in Spanish]

Colomer-Pérez N(1)(2), Gea-Caballero V(3)(4), Chover-Sierra E(1),
Paredes-Carbonell JJ(1)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Facultat d'Infermeria i Podologia. Universitat de València. València. España.
(2)Instituto Universitario de Investigación en Tráfico y Seguridad Vial (INTRAS) 
Universitat de València. Valencia. España.
(3)Escuela Enfermería La Fe, centro adscrito Universitat de València. Valencia.
España.
(4)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria IIS La Fe. GREIACC. Valencia. España.
(5)Centre de Salut Pública d'Alzira. Conselleria de Sanitat Universal i Salut
Pública. Alzira. Valencia.España.
(6)Fundació per al Foment de la Investigació Sanitària i Biomèdica de la
Comunitat Valenciana (FISA-BIO). Valencia. España.


PMID: 30556541 


214. Intensive Crit Care Nurs. 2019 Feb;50:111-117. doi: 10.1016/j.iccn.2018.11.009.
Epub 2018 Dec 3.

Reprint of Recovery programme for ICU survivors has no effect on relatives'
quality of life: Secondary analysis of the RAPIT-study.

Bohart S(1), Egerod I(2), Bestle MH(3), Overgaard D(4), Christensen DF(5), Jensen
JF(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen,
Herlev Ringvej 75, 2730 Herlev, Denmark. Electronic address:
soes.bohart@regionh.dk.
(2)Health & Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, and Intensive Care Unit
4131, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen,
Denmark. Electronic address: Ingrid.egerod@regionh.dk.
(3)Nordsjællands Hospital, Dyrehavevej 29, 3400 Hillerød, Denmark. Electronic
address: morten.bestle@regionh.dk.
(4)Institution of Nursing, Metropolitan University College, Tagensvej 86, 2200
Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address: doov@phmetropol.dk.
(5)Nordsjællands Hospital, Dyrehavevej 29, 3400 Hillerød, Denmark.
(6)Department of Anesthesiology, Holbæk Hospital, Smedelundsgade 60, 4300 Holbæk 
and Nordsjællands Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Dyrehavevej 29, 3400
Hilleroed, Denmark. Electronic address: jfje@regionsjaelland.dk.

BACKGROUND: Relatives of intensive care patients are at risk of developing
symptoms of anxiety, depression and posttraumatic stress resulting in reduced
health-related quality of life. Recovery programmes for patients have been
implemented, but their effect on relatives is uncertain.
AIM: To determine whether relatives benefit from a recovery programme intended
for intensive care survivors.
RESEARCH DESIGN: A randomised controlled trial of 181 adult relatives:
intervention group (n = 87), control group (n = 94).
SETTING: Ten intensive care units in Denmark.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Primary outcome: health-related quality of life (HRQOL).
SECONDARY OUTCOMES: Sense of coherence (SOC), and symptoms of anxiety, depression
and posttraumatic stress, compared to standard care at 12 months after intensive 
care discharge.
RESULTS: No difference in HRQOL between groups was observed at 12 months (mean
difference in mental component summary score, 1.35 [CI 95%: -3.13; 5.82],
p = 0.55; and physical component summery score, 1.86 [CI 95%: -1.88; 5.59],
p = 0.33). No differences were found in secondary outcomes.
CONCLUSION: The recovery programme intended for intensive care survivors did not 
have an effect on the relatives. Future recovery programmes should be targeted to
help both patient and family, and future research should be conducted on a larger
scale to make conclusions with higher probability.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.iccn.2018.11.009 
PMID: 30522822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Acta Biomed. 2018 Dec 7;89(7-S):70-77. doi: 10.23750/abm.v89i7-S.7863.

Mapping Caregivers' Health Assets. A self-care project using Salutogenesis and
Mindfulness.

Alpuente AC(1), Cintas FA, Foà C, Cosentino C.

Author information: 
(1)ADEIT University-Business Foundation, University of Valencia (Spain).
info@mindfoodness.es.

BACKGROUND: Thousands of caregivers around the world take care of impaired
people, with negative repercussions on their physical, psychological, social and 
economic resources. The need to promote caregivers' wellbeing is internationally 
recognized, thus reducing health inequalities. Mindfulness is a powerful tool,
directly related to the reduction of stress, able to increase skills and
attitudes promoting well-being. The basis of this project of community
development based on active health, is the self-care achieved through
mindfulness.
AIMS: The overall aim of this project is to improve the caregivers' health and
quality of life through community mapping strategies and mindfulness.
METHODS: According to the salutogenic model, and to the model of community
development based on active health (ABCD) we will create a map of the caregivers'
internal and external health assets. The project will have a participatory action
research methodology, and it will go throygh five different phases, with
mindfulness as a central tool.
RESULTS: At the end of the project, results will be analyzed referring to
structures, processes and objective and subjective outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: At the end of the project, we will evaluate if the Salutogenic ABCD 
methodology along with Mindfulness, will be able to reduce health inequalities
improving caregivers' wellbeing.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v89i7-S.7863 
PMCID: PMC6502141
PMID: 30539930  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Nurs Open. 2018 Jul 30;6(1):50-58. doi: 10.1002/nop2.180. eCollection 2019 Jan.

Parental involvement in decision-making about their child's health care at the
hospital.

Aarthun A(1)(2), Øymar KA(1)(3), Akerjordet K(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics Stavanger University Hospital Stavanger Norway.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences University of Stavanger Stavanger Norway.
(3)University of Bergen Bergen Norway.
(4)School of Psychology, Faculty of Social Sciences University of Wollongong NSW 
Australia.

Aim: To explore parents' experiences on parental involvement in decision-making
about their child's health care at the hospital and to identify how health
professionals can improve parental involvement.
Design: An explorative descriptive qualitative study within a constructivist
research paradigm.
Methods: Individual semistructured interviews were conducted with a purposive
sample of 12 parents. Qualitative content analysis was performed.
Results: This study gives unique insight into how parental involvement in
children's healthcare decisions influence parents' ability to cope with the
parental role at the hospital. The results showed that parents' competence and
perceived influence and control over their child's health care appeared to affect
how they mastered their role of involvement in decision-making. Individually
tailored and respectful facilitation of parental involvement in these decisions
by health professionals seemed to improve parents' influence, control and ability
to cope with the parental role. Nurses should thus strengthen parents' sense of
coherence enhancing the quality of health care.

DOI: 10.1002/nop2.180 
PMCID: PMC6279730
PMID: 30534394 


217. Clin Interv Aging. 2018 Nov 14;13:2317-2328. doi: 10.2147/CIA.S177791.
eCollection 2018.

Distribution and evaluation of sense of coherence among older immigrants before
and after a health promotion intervention - results from the RCT study promoting 
aging migrants' capability.

Arola LA(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Barenfeld E(1)(2)(3), Dahlin-Ivanoff S(1)(2)(3),
Häggblom-Kronlöf G(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Section for Health and
Rehabilitation, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Sweden,
annikki.arola@arcada.fi.
(2)Centre for Person-Centred Care (GPCC), The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of 
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, annikki.arola@arcada.fi.
(3)Centre for Ageing and Health - Agecap, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of 
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, annikki.arola@arcada.fi.
(4)National Graduate School on Ageing and Health - SWEAH, Faculty of Medicine,
Lund University, Lund, Sweden, annikki.arola@arcada.fi.
(5)Department of Health and Welfare, Arcada University of Applied Science,
Helsinki, Finland, annikki.arola@arcada.fi.

Background: The migration process can be a threat to a person's sense of
coherence (SOC) and to their ability to experience life as comprehensible,
manageable, and meaningful. Seen from a salutogenic perspective, this may have a 
negative impact on the experience of health.
Purpose: We describe the distribution of SOC and its components among older
persons with an immigrant background now aging in Sweden. In addition, we
evaluated whether a group-based health promotion program with a person-centered
approach could support the SOC among older persons in this group.
Materials and methods: A randomized controlled trial with postintervention
follow-ups at 6 and 12 months was conducted with 131 independently living persons
aged ≥70 years from Finland and the Balkan Peninsula. Participants were randomly 
allocated to an intervention group (4 weeks of group intervention and one
follow-up home visit) and a control group (no intervention but access to ordinary
health care services). The outcome measure was the SOC measured by SOC-13.
Chi-square and ORs were calculated.
Results: There was a significant improvement in total SOC scores for the
intervention group at 6-month follow-up. Also, the ORs for the SOC components
were higher in the person-centered intervention group. However, we found no
significant between-group differences nor did the effect last until the 12-month 
follow-up.
Conclusion: Persons who have lived a long time in a host country after migration 
seem to have a SOC similar to native-born persons. Interventions with a
person-centered approach could support the SOC by capturing individual life
situations. Such interventions could support older persons by making everyday
life more comprehensible and manageable and helping them to cope with challenges 
in daily life caused by aging.

DOI: 10.2147/CIA.S177791 
PMCID: PMC6241858
PMID: 30532522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of
interest in this work.


218. BMJ Open. 2018 Dec 9;8(12):e023017. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023017.

Short-term effect of a chronic pain self-management intervention delivered by an 
easily accessible primary healthcare service: a randomised controlled trial.

Nøst TH(1)(2), Steinsbekk A(1), Bratås O(1)(2), Grønning K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Nursing, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
(2)Center for Health Promotion Research, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Trondheim, Norway.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the effects on persons with chronic pain after
3 months of a group-based chronic pain self-management course compared with a
drop-in, low-impact outdoor physical group activity on patient activation and a
range of secondary outcomes.
DESIGN: An open, pragmatic, parallel group randomised controlled trial. Analyses 
were performed using a two-level linear mixed model.
SETTING: An easily accessible healthcare service provided by Norwegian public
primary healthcare.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 121 participants with self-reported chronic pain for
3 months or more were randomised with 60 participants placed in the intervention 
group and 61 placed in the control group (mean age 53 years, 88% women, 63% pain 
for 10 years or more).
INTERVENTIONS: The intervention group was offered a group-based chronic pain
self-management course with 2.5-hour weekly sessions for a period of 6 weeks. The
sessions consisted of education, movement exercises and emphasised group
discussions. The control group was offered a low-impact outdoor group physical
activity in 1-hour weekly sessions that consisted of walking and simple strength 
exercises for a period of 6 weeks.
MAIN OUTCOMES: The primary outcome was patient activation assessed using the
Patient Activation Measure. Secondary outcomes measured included assessments of
pain, anxiety and depression, pain self-efficacy, sense of coherence,
health-related quality of life, well-being and the 30 s chair to stand test.
RESULTS: There was no effect after 3 months of the group-based chronic pain
self-management course compared with the control group for the primary outcome,
patient activation (estimated mean difference: -0.5, 95% CI -4.8 to 3.7,
p=0.802).
CONCLUSIONS: There was no support for the self-management course having a better 
effect after 3 months than a low-impact outdoor physical activity offered the
control group.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT02531282; Results.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2018. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023017 
PMCID: PMC6303596
PMID: 30530580  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


219. J Dent Educ. 2018 Dec;82(12):1343-1350. doi: 10.21815/JDE.018.142.

Relationship Between Resilience and Self-Rated Health in Dental Hygiene Students 
and Registered Dental Hygienists.

Isobe A(1), Izumi M(1), Akifusa S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ayaka Isobe, RDH, MOHSc, is Assistant Professor, Department of Support for
Senior Citizens, Kyushu Dental University, Fukuoka, Japan; Maya Izumi, RDH, MSN, 
PhD, is Lecturer, School of Oral Health Sciences, Kyushu Dental University,
Fukuoka, Japan; and Sumio Akifusa, DDS, PhD, is Professor, School of Oral Health 
Sciences, Kyushu Dental University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Ayaka Isobe, RDH, MOHSc, is Assistant Professor, Department of Support for
Senior Citizens, Kyushu Dental University, Fukuoka, Japan; Maya Izumi, RDH, MSN, 
PhD, is Lecturer, School of Oral Health Sciences, Kyushu Dental University,
Fukuoka, Japan; and Sumio Akifusa, DDS, PhD, is Professor, School of Oral Health 
Sciences, Kyushu Dental University, Fukuoka, Japan. r11akifusa@fa.kyu-dent.ac.jp.

The aim of this study was to investigate whether two aspects of
resilience-acquired and innate resilience-were related to self-rated health
status in registered dental hygienists and students. In May through July 2017,
405 students at three dental hygiene programs and 85 registered dental
hygienists, all in Fukuoka prefecture in Japan, were invited to participate in a 
survey including three scales: the Bidimensional Resilience Scale (BRS) to assess
innate and acquired resilience, the Stress Response Scale-18 (SRS-18) to assess
daily stress responses, and the Sense of Coherence 13-item scale (SOC-13) to
assess the sense of coherence. Information about self-rated health status and
number of years of clinical experience was also collected. Respondents were 398
students (98.2% response rate) and all 85 dental hygienists (100% response rate).
The cohort with a self-rated "healthy" status scored higher on total scale and
each domain of the BRS, SRS-18, and SOC-13 scales than the cohort with other
self-rated health statuses. These three scales and self-rated health status were 
significantly correlated with each other. When innate resilience increased by one
point, average self-rated health was 1.14-fold higher. In contrast, when the
depression/anxiety domain score of SRS-18 increased by one point, self-rated
health was 0.84-fold lower. The number of years of clinical experience was also
negatively correlated with self-rated health. For these participants, innate
resilience was a significant predictor of better self-rated health. To maintain
the health of dental hygienists and students, it is important to understand their
innate resilience as well as stress responses related to depression/anxiety
factors and length of clinical experience.

DOI: 10.21815/JDE.018.142 
PMID: 30504473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2018 Nov 29;15(12). pii: E2698. doi:
10.3390/ijerph15122698.

Healthy Design and Urban Planning Strategies, Actions, and Policy to Achieve
Salutogenic Cities.

Capolongo S(1), Rebecchi A(2), Dettori M(3), Appolloni L(4), Azara A(5), Buffoli 
M(6), Capasso L(7), Casuccio A(8), Oliveri Conti G(9), D'Amico A(10), Ferrante
M(11), Moscato U(12), Oberti I(13), Paglione L(14), Restivo V(15), D'Alessandro
D(16).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Architettura, Ingegneria delle Costruzioni e Ambiente
Costruito, Politecnico di Milano, 20133 Milan, Italy.
stefano.capolongo@polimi.it.
(2)Dipartimento di Architettura, Ingegneria delle Costruzioni e Ambiente
Costruito, Politecnico di Milano, 20133 Milan, Italy. andrea.rebecchi@polimi.it.
(3)Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche, Chirurgiche e Sperimentali, Università degli 
Studi di Sassari, 07100 Sassari, Italy. madettori@uniss.it.
(4)Dipartimento di Ingegneria Civile Edile e Ambientale, Sapienza Università di
Roma, 00184 Rome, Italy. letizia.appolloni@uniroma1.it.
(5)Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche, Chirurgiche e Sperimentali, Università degli 
Studi di Sassari, 07100 Sassari, Italy. azara@uniss.it.
(6)Dipartimento di Architettura, Ingegneria delle Costruzioni e Ambiente
Costruito, Politecnico di Milano, 20133 Milan, Italy.
maddalena.buffoli@polimi.it.
(7)Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica, Medicina Sperimentale e Forense, Università
degli Studi di Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy. lorenzo.capasso@unipv.it.
(8)Dipartimento di Scienze per la Promozione della Salute e Materno Infantile,
Università degli Studi di Palermo, 90133 Palermo, Italy.
alessandra.casuccio@unipa.it.
(9)Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche Chirurgiche e Tecnologie Avanzate, Università 
degli Studi di Catania, 95131 Catania, Italy. olivericonti@unict.it.
(10)Dipartimento di Ingegneria Civile Edile e Ambientale, Sapienza Università di 
Roma, 00184 Rome, Italy. alessandro.damico@uniroma1.it.
(11)Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche Chirurgiche e Tecnologie Avanzate, Università
degli Studi di Catania, 95131 Catania, Italy. marfer@unict.it.
(12)Fondazione Policlinico Agostino Gemelli IRCCS, Università Cattolica del Sacro
Cuore, 00168 Rome, Italy. umberto.moscato@unicatt.it.
(13)Dipartimento di Architettura, Ingegneria delle Costruzioni e Ambiente
Costruito, Politecnico di Milano, 20133 Milan, Italy. ilaria.oberti@polimi.it.
(14)Dipartimento di Ingegneria Civile Edile e Ambientale, Sapienza Università di 
Roma, 00184 Rome, Italy. lorenzo.paglione@uniroma1.it.
(15)Dipartimento di Scienze per la Promozione della Salute e Materno Infantile,
Università degli Studi di Palermo, 90133 Palermo, Italy.
vincenzo.restivo@unipa.it.
(16)Dipartimento di Ingegneria Civile Edile e Ambientale, Sapienza Università di 
Roma, 00184 Rome, Italy. daniela.dalessandro@uniroma1.it.

Starting from a previous experience carried out by the working group "Building
and Environmental Hygiene" of the Italian Society of Hygiene and Preventive
Medicine (SItI), the aim of the present work is to define new strategic goals for
achieving a "Healthy and Salutogenic City", which will be useful to designers,
local governments and public bodies, policy makers, and all professionals working
at local health agencies. Ten key points have been formulated: 1. climate change 
and management of adverse weather events; 2. land consumption, sprawl, and
shrinking cities; 3. tactical urbanism and urban resilience; 4. urban comfort,
safety, and security perception; 5. strengths and weaknesses of urban green areas
and infrastructures; 6. urban solid waste management; 7. housing emergencies in
relation to socio-economic and environmental changes; 8. energy aspects and
environmental planning at an urban scale; 9. socio-assistance and welfare network
at an urban scale: importance of a rational and widespread system; and 10. new
forms of living, conscious of coparticipation models and aware of sharing quality
objectives. Design strategies, actions, and policies, identified to improve
public health and wellbeing, underline that the connection between morphological 
and functional features of urban context and public health is crucial for
contemporary cities and modern societies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph15122698 
PMCID: PMC6313765
PMID: 30501119  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2018 Nov 8;13:3677-3688. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S181005. eCollection 2018.

Effects of a COPD self-management support intervention: a randomized controlled
trial.

Bringsvor HB(1)(2), Langeland E(3), Oftedal BF(2), Skaug K(1), Assmus J(4),
Bentsen SB(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research and Innovation, Helse Fonna HF, Haugesund, Norway,
heidi.breistrand.bringsvor@helse-fonna.no.
(2)Department of Quality and Health Technology, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Stavanger, Stavanger, Norway,
heidi.breistrand.bringsvor@helse-fonna.no.
(3)Department of Health and Caring Sciences, Western Norway University of Applied
Sciences, Bergen, Norway.
(4)Center for Clinical Research, Department of Reserach and Innovation, Haukeland
University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(5)SHARE-Centre for Resilience in Health Care, Department of Quality and Health
Technology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Stavanger, Stavanger,
Norway.

Background: This study examines the effects of the COPD-specific health promoting
self-management intervention "Better living with COPD" on different
self-management-related domains, self-efficacy, and sense of coherence (SOC).
Methods: In a randomized controlled design, 182 people with COPD were allocated
to either an intervention group (offered Better living with COPD in addition to
usual care) or a control group (usual care). Self-management-related domains were
measured by the Health Education Impact Questionnaire (heiQ) before and after
intervention. Self-efficacy was measured by the General Self-Efficacy Scale (GSE)
and SOC was measured by the 13-item Sense of Coherence Scale (SOC-13). Effects
were assessed by ANCOVA, using intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis and per-protocol
analysis (PPA).
Results: The PPA and the ITT analysis showed significant positive changes on
Constructive attitudes and approaches (heiQ) (ITT: P=0.0069; PPA: P=0.0021) and
Skill and technique acquisition (heiQ) (ITT: P=0.0405; PPA: P=0.0356).
Self-monitoring and insight (heiQ) showed significant positive change in the PPA 
(P=0.0494). No significant changes were found on the other self-management
domains (heiQ), self-efficacy (GSE), or SOC (SOC-13).
Conclusion: Better living with COPD had a significant positive short-term effect 
on some self-management-related domains, and could be an intervention
contributing to the support of self-management in people with COPD. However,
further work is needed to establish the clinical relevance of the findings and to
evaluate the long-term effects.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S181005 
PMCID: PMC6231510
PMID: 30510410  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of
interest in this work.


222. Retina. 2019 Oct;39(10):1889-1895. doi: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000002406.

RETINAL CAPILLARY MACROANEURYSMS.

Spaide RF(1), Barquet LA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vitreous, Retina, Macula Consultants of New York, New York.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, Barcelona,
Spain.

Comment in
    Retina. 2019 Nov;39(11):e48-e49.
    Retina. 2019 Nov;39(11):e49-e50.

PURPOSE: To investigate eyes with solitary large aneurysms arising from retinal
capillaries.
METHODS: Consecutive patients with aneurysms greater than 200 µm in diameter were
evaluated with a comprehensive ophthalmologic examination including optical
coherence tomography, optical coherence tomography angiography, and fluorescein
angiography. The aneurysms were solitary in the sense, and there was only one
aneurysm larger than the threshold diameter and a few or no other aneurysms.
RESULTS: There were 5 patients, 3 male patients, who had aneurysms that reached a
maximal mean size of 273.4 µm. One patient had stable diabetic retinopathy and
had a documented growth of a capillary aneurysm to 331 µm over an 8-year 7-month 
period until the aneurysm was associated with widespread edema. The remaining 4
patients did not have diabetes or any discernable retinal vascular disease.
Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor treatment was associated with a partial
response in one patient and no apparent response in the others. Laser
photocoagulation of the aneurysms resulted in resolution of the edema and
involution of the lesions.
CONCLUSION: Large aneurysms arising from retinal capillaries occur and have a
candidate name of retinal capillary macroaneurysms. Histologic evaluation of
retinal capillary aneurysms shows the presence of matrix metalloproteinase-9,
which may function to decrease the wall strength in the face of increasing wall
tension from aneurysmal expansion, as predicted by LaPlace's law. Thus, retinal
capillary macroaneurysms may have multiple forces driving their formation.

DOI: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000002406 
PMID: 30489449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Work. 2018;61(4):627-637. doi: 10.3233/WOR-182830.

Understanding salutogenic approaches to managing intensive work: Experiences from
three Swedish companies.

Palm K(1)(2), Eriksson A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Learning, Informatics, Management, and Ethics, Karolinska
Universitet, Solna, Sweden.
(2)Department of Sustainable Production Development, School of Industrial
Engineering and Management, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Södertölje,
Sweden.
(3)Department of Ergonomics, School of Technology and Health, KTH Royal Institute
of Technology, Huddinge, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Recent research has highlighted the risks involved in work
intensification; i.e. the risk of human resources being consumed, incurring
higher risks of emotional ill health such as burnout among employees. At the same
time, there are some indications that individual employees are being left to
themselves to manage work tasks in intensive work environments.
OBJECTIVE: This article explores how strongly engaged people master intensive
work through coping and job crafting in a salutogenic way.
METHODS: The article is based on 34 in depth interviews of persons in various
professions within research and development departments in three Swedish
companies.
RESULTS: The interviews indicated that employees generally experienced work as
almost constantly intense. We identified two strategies for mastering intensive
work; i.e. an active strategy and a cognitive strategy, involving elements of
both coping and job crafting. The specific elements of these strategies determine
whether salutogenic processes are present.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that it is the specific elements of the coping
and job-crafting strategies that determine whether or not salutogenic processes
occur, and that organisational support is an important supplement to the
individual processes for mastering intensive work.

DOI: 10.3233/WOR-182830 
PMID: 30475784  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2019 Mar;57(3):627-634. doi:
10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2018.11.016. Epub 2018 Nov 23.

Multicenter Study of the Psychometric Properties of the New Demoralization Scale 
(DS-II) in Spanish-Speaking Advanced Cancer Patients.

Belar A(1), Arantzamendi M(2), Rodríguez-Núñez A(3), Santesteban Y(4), Martinez
M(5), López-Saca M(6), Consigli S(7), López-Fidalgo J(8), Centeno C(9).

Author information: 
(1)Universidad de Navarra, ICS, ATLANTES, Pamplona, Spain; IdiSNA, Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(2)Universidad de Navarra, ICS, ATLANTES, Pamplona, Spain; IdiSNA, Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. Electronic address:
marantz@unav.es.
(3)Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(4)Hospital San Juan de Dios, EAPS Caixa, Pamplona, Spain.
(5)Clínica Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; IdiSNA, Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(6)Universidad Dr. José Matías Delgado, Antiguo Cuscatlán, El Salvador.
(7)Hospital Universitario Austral, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(8)Universidad de Navarra, ICS, Unidad de Estadística, Pamplona, Spain.
(9)Universidad de Navarra, ICS, ATLANTES, Pamplona, Spain; Clínica Universidad de
Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; IdiSNA, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de
Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

CONTEXT: Demoralization is a state of existential distress in patients with
advanced illness, typically with coping difficulties, feelings of loss of sense, 
and purpose in life and despair, among other things. The New Demoralization Scale
(DS-II) is an evaluation tool for this syndrome, which has recently been
reformulated on a shorter scale.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to obtain a Spanish version of the
DS-II and to assess its psychometric properties in advanced cancer patients in
Spain and a number of Latin American countries.
METHODS: Following a translation-back translation process, a validation study and
a confirmatory analysis using structural equation models with their corresponding
latent constructs were undertaken. Patients completed the DS-II in Spanish (DS-II
(es)), the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, and the Edmonton Symptom
Assessment System-revised. Reliability was studied according to internal
consistency; construct validity and concurrent validity with the Hospital Anxiety
and Depression Scale and the Edmonton Symptom Assessment System-revised;
discriminant validity using the Karnofsky Performance Status scale; and
feasibility, with response ratio and required time. Cutoff points were
established, and sensitivity and specificity were studied.
RESULTS: The DS-II (es) was obtained. One hundred fifty patients completed the
validation study. The confirmatory analysis showed coherence, and all items
correlated positively with their subscales and with the overall scale. Cronbach's
alpha for the DS-II (es) was 0.88, for the sense and purpose subscale 0.83, and
for the coping ability 0.79. Demoralization correlated significantly with
emotional distress (rho = 0.73, P < 0.001). The tool distinguished between
patients with diverse functional levels (rho = -0.319, P = 0.001). Cutoff points 
at 10 and 20 out of 32 were established. The scale showed high sensitivity
(81.97%) and specificity (80.90%). The prevalence of demoralization was 33% in
our sample.
CONCLUSION: The Spanish version of the new Kissane DS-II demoralization scale has
shown to be valid, reliable, and feasible with adequate psychometric properties.

Copyright © 2018 American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine. Published
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2018.11.016 
PMID: 30472315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Clin Interv Aging. 2018 Nov 1;13:2215-2224. doi: 10.2147/CIA.S183276. eCollection
2018.

The effects of an empowering self-management model on self-efficacy and sense of 
coherence among retired elderly with chronic diseases: a randomized controlled
trial.

Hourzad A(1), Pouladi S(1), Ostovar A(2), Ravanipour M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Bushehr University of 
Medical Sciences, Bushehr, Iran.
(2)Osteoporosis Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical Sciences
Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Nursing, School of Nursing and Midwifery; and The Persian Gulf
Tropical Medicine Research Center, The Persian Gulf Biomedical Sciences Research 
Institute, Bushehr University of Medical Sciences, Bushehr, Iran,
ravanipour@gmail.com.

Background: Being elderly and retired are related phenomena that overlap in a
time symmetry. The present study aimed to assess the effect of an empowering
self-management model on the self-efficacy and sense of coherence (SOC) in
retired elderly with chronic diseases.
Methods: A randomized controlled trial that included 60 elderly people was
carried out in Bushehr (Iran) in 2016. The participants were randomly assigned to
either a control group or an intervention group. Based on an empowering
self-management model, the intervention group participated in a five-stage plan: 
1) self-awareness of changes and understanding their personal level of
performance and expectations; 2) optimal goal setting; 3) planning; 4) adjusting 
physical, psychological, and social structures; and 5) evaluation. Self-efficacy 
and SOC were measured using the questionnaires developed by Sherer and
Antonovsky, respectively, before and after the intervention. The results of the
observed differences between the groups were subsequently compared. Data were
presented as mean±SD.
Results: The mean change of the self-efficacy score in the intervention and
control groups was 9.48±5.32 and 1.68± 6.04, respectively, (t[56]=5.20, P<0.001).
The mean change of the SOC score in the intervention and control groups was
24.17±12.05 and 0.10±13.42, respectively, (t[56]=7.18, P<0.001).
Conclusion: The applied empowering self-management model led to an improved
self-efficacy and SOC among the retired elderly with chronic diseases. This model
can be used to empower the elderly to achieve comprehensibility, manageability,
and meaningfulness in their lives.

DOI: 10.2147/CIA.S183276 
PMCID: PMC6219101
PMID: 30464430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of
interest in this work.


226. Dermatol Ther. 2019 Jan;32(1):e12783. doi: 10.1111/dth.12783. Epub 2018 Dec 18.

Salutogenesis and beyond.

d'Alessio PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)AISA Therapeutics, Villejuif, France.

In the present hypothesis paper on paradoxes in preventive medicine, which also
deals with the indocility of biological functions, the following issues will be
addressed. First, a definition of salutogenesis will be given, providing the
origin of this notion of health preservation and disease prevention. Then, four
paradoxes of the biology of health will be discussed. The first deals with the
biomarkers of aging. The second addresses the good and bad of the much praised
antioxidants. The third details how the mammalian transporter of rapamycin
pathway plays a discreet but fundamental role. The fourth explores the yin and
yang effects of the secretory profile of senescent cells. In conclusion, the need
for a new paradigm in preventive medicine will be proposed.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/dth.12783 
PMID: 30461137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Health Psychol Open. 2018 Nov 4;5(2):2055102918810654. doi:
10.1177/2055102918810654. eCollection 2018 Jul-Dec.

The overlap of sense of coherence and the Big Five personality traits: A
confirmatory study.

Kase T(1), Ueno Y(2), Oishi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Rikkyo University, Japan.
(2)Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Japan.

Sense of coherence is the perception of the world as coherent. Its conceptual
similarities to the Big Five personality traits have been demonstrated. We
therefore investigated the relationship between sense of coherence and the Big
Five. In total, 1088 Japanese youths completed the 29-item Sense of Coherence
Scale and the Ten-Item Personality Inventory. Neuroticism was negatively
correlated and extraversion was positively correlated with comprehensibility
(r = -.47, .35), manageability (r = -.44, .26), and meaningfulness (r = -.28,
.30). These correlations were strong, and the overlap between the two scales was 
about 36 percent. While the Big Five are related to sense of coherence, their
differences cannot be ignored.

DOI: 10.1177/2055102918810654 
PMCID: PMC6236496
PMID: 30450215 


228. Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging. 2019 Jan;4(1):72-80. doi:
10.1016/j.bpsc.2018.09.009. Epub 2018 Oct 3.

Chronic Early Stress Impairs Default Mode Network Connectivity in Preadolescents 
and Their Mothers.

Zeev-Wolf M(1), Levy J(2), Goldstein A(3), Zagoory-Sharon O(2), Feldman R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Education, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba,
Israel.
(2)School of Psychology, Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya, Herzliya, Israel.
(3)Department of Psychology and the Gonda Brain Research Center, Bar Ilan
University, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(4)School of Psychology, Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya, Herzliya, Israel;
Yale University Child Study Center, New Haven, Connecticut. Electronic address:
feldman.ruth@gmail.com.

Comment in
    Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging. 2019 Jan;4(1):5-7.

BACKGROUND: Early life stress (ELS) bears long-term negative consequences
throughout life. Yet ELS effect is mostly unknown, and no study has followed
children to test its impact on the default mode network (DMN) in relation to
maternal behavior across childhood. Focusing on brain oscillations, we utilized a
unique cohort of war-exposed preadolescent children (11-13 years of age) and
their mothers followed from early childhood to examine the effects of ELS
combined with observed parenting on DMN connectivity and power in mother and
child.
METHODS: Participants included 161 mothers and children (children: 39 exposed/36 
control subjects; mothers: 44 exposed/42 control subjects) who underwent
magnetoencephalography scanning during rest.
RESULTS: Stress exposure reduced DMN connectivity in mother and child; however,
in mothers, the impaired connectivity occurred in the alpha band, whereas among
children it occurred in the theta band, a biomarker of the developing brain.
Maternal anxiety, depression, and posttraumatic symptoms in early childhood
predicted lower maternal DMN connectivity. Among children, the experience of
intrusive, anxious, and uncontained parenting across the first decade and greater
cortisol production in late childhood predicted reduced DMN connectivity in
preadolescence. Impairments to theta DMN connectivity increased in children with 
posttraumatic stress disorder.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings indicate that ELS disrupts the synchronous coordination of 
distinct brain areas into coherent functioning of the DMN network, a core network
implicated in self-relevant processes. Results suggest that one pathway for the
lifelong effects of ELS on psychopathology and physical illness relate to
impaired coherence of the DMN and its role in maintaining quiescence, alternating
internal and external attention, and supporting the sense of self.

Copyright © 2018 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpsc.2018.09.009 
PMID: 30446436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Aging Ment Health. 2019 Nov;23(11):1562-1568. doi: 10.1080/13607863.2018.1501667.
Epub 2018 Nov 16.

A salutogenic inquiry into positive aging - a longitudinal analysis.

Wiesmann U(1), Hannich HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Psychology, University Medicine Greifswald , Greifswald 
, Germany.

Objectives: Based on a gero-salutogenic approach, we investigated the stability
of the sense of coherence over a time span of four years in active older
individuals and long-term effects of this life orientation on three different
indicators of positive aging-subjective well-being, psychological health and
physical health. This is the first study to explore associations between gain in 
sense of coherence and future positive aging. Methods: Our longitudinal sample
consisted of 125 physically active individuals (73.5% women) at the mean age of
71 years at follow-up (range: 64 to 87 years; response rate: 73.5%), who
completed our questionnaire twice. There were no systematic differences between
the follow-up responders and non-responders. Results: The sense of coherence
increased over four years, disclosing a small effect size. The baseline sense of 
coherence had a substantial predictive value for future subjective well-being and
psychological health, but not for physical health. Stepwise hierarchical
regression analyses showed that both the baseline sense of coherence and gain in 
sense of coherence predicted future subjective well-being and psychological
health. With respect to future physical health, only gain in sense of coherence
was significant. Conclusion: Consistent with gero-salutogenic theory, the
baseline sense of coherence is an effective predictor of future positive aging,
and growth in sense of coherence within a time span of four years is reflected in
improved positive aging. It is important to encourage experiences in older age
that cultivate the three components of the sense of coherence-feelings of
comprehensibility, manageability and meaningfulness.

DOI: 10.1080/13607863.2018.1501667 
PMID: 30444131  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Psychiatr Danub. 2018 Dec;30(4):380-384. doi: 10.24869/psyd.2018.380.

Empathy, Sense of Coherence and Resilience: Bridging Personal, Public and Global 
Mental Health and Conceptual Synthesis.

Jakovljevic M(1).

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Department of Psychiatry, Kišpatićeva 12,
10000 Zagreb, Croatia, psychiatry@kbc-zagreb.hr.

Different ways of thinking about policy-making for public and global mental
health are constantly emerging. Turning patients into consumers and mental health
into commodity may open the door for dystopic future of mental health care.
Research has indicated that practicing love, kindness, and compassion for
ourselves and others builds our confidence and sense of coherence, helps us
create meaningful, caring relationships, increases individual and community
resilience and well-being, promotes human rights, physical and mental health.
Public and global mental health promotion may be predicated on the theory of
salutogenesis and three key inter-related terms: empathy, coherence and
resilience. The WHO Mental Health Action Plan 2013-20120 is based on the vision
of a world in which mental health is valued, promoted and protected, and has four
objectives: to improve leadership and governance, health and social care,
promotion and prevention, and information and research. Practicing public and
global actions that promote and educate empathy, coherence and resilience may
significantly help achieving equality for mental health in the 21st century and
improving public and global mental health.

DOI: 10.24869/psyd.2018.380 
PMID: 30439796  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Ophthalmologe. 2019 Aug;116(8):789-793. doi: 10.1007/s00347-018-0804-z.

[Progressive loss of vision in cone dystrophy. Search for evidence with macular
OCT and multifocal ERG].

[Article in German]

Schröter A(1), Kosanetzky N(2), Kawan R(2), Funk I(2), Grünauer-Kloevekorn
C(2)(3), Neß T(4), Heinzelmann S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Praxisklinik Augenärzte am Markt, Große Nikolaistr. 1, 06108, Halle (Saale),
Deutschland. schroeter@praxis-klinik-markt.de.
(2)Praxisklinik Augenärzte am Markt, Große Nikolaistr. 1, 06108, Halle (Saale),
Deutschland.
(3)Medizinische Fakultät, Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg, Halle
(Saale), Deutschland.
(4)Klinik für Augenheilkunde, Universitätsklinikum Freiburg, Freiburg,
Deutschland.

A 53-year-old patient consulted our practice clinic complaining of progressive
visual loss, increased glare sensitivity and color sense disorder. Extensive
diagnostic investigation, including multifocal ERG (mfERG) and macular thickness 
map with the help of optical coherence tomography (OCT), supported the suspected 
diagnosis of a cone dystrophy. There are, however, no established therapeutic
options. A diagnostic confirmation by means of molecular genetics was not
successful.

DOI: 10.1007/s00347-018-0804-z 
PMID: 30426193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Bras Nefrol. 2019 Jan-Mar;41(1):22-28. doi: 10.1590/2175-8239-JBN-2018-0096.
Epub 2018 Nov 8.

Association between religiosity and happiness in patients with chronic kidney
disease on hemodialysis.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Siqueira J(1), Fernandes NM(1), Moreira-Almeida A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora, Faculdade de Medicina, NUPES - Núcleo de
Pesquisas em Espiritualidade e Saúde, Juiz de Fora, MG, Brasil.

OBJECTIVES: Religiosity/spirituality (R/S) seems to be a relevant factor in
chronic diseases adaptation, but there is a lack of studies involving chronic
kidney disease (CKD). This study aimed to investigate the association between R/S
and happiness among CKD patients on hemodialysis and whether Sense of Coherence
(SC) mediates this possible association.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study in two renal replacement therapy
centers in Brazil, involving 161 adults on hemodialysis. Linear regressions were 
performed to evaluate the association between R/S (predicting variable measured
with Duke Religious Index - DUREL) and happiness (outcome variable), adjusted for
sociodemographic, clinical, and some laboratory variables. Later, SC was added to
the model to test the possible mediating effect.
RESULTS: Most patients (91.20%) reported some religious affiliation. Private
Religiosity (PR) (β = 0.53; 95% CI = 0.01 a 1.06), Intrinsic Religiosity (IR) (β 
= 0.48; 95% CI = 0.18 a 0.79), and SC (β = 0.11; 95% CI = -0.09 a 0.15)
correlated with higher levels of happiness, controlling for clinical and
sociodemographic variables. When SC was included in the model, IR (β = 0.34; 95% 
CI = 0.07 to 0.60) and SC (β = 0.11; 95% CI = 0.08 to 0.14) remained
significantly. No clinical or sociodemographic variable correlated with
happiness.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients on hemodialysis showed high levels of R/S, which correlated
with higher happiness levels. Clinical and sociodemographic variables were not
correlated with patients' happiness. Psychosocial variables such as R/S and SC
are potential key targets for interventions to promote better survival quality
among CKD patients.

DOI: 10.1590/2175-8239-jbn-2018-0096 
PMCID: PMC6534031
PMID: 30421782  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Cent Eur J Public Health. 2018 Sep;26(3):209-214. doi: 10.21101/cejph.a4731.

Association between computer game type, playing time and sense of coherence in
Lithuanian adolescents.

Ustinavičienė R(1), Škėmienė L(1), Lukšienė D(1), Radišauskas R(1), Kalinienė
G(1), Vasilavičius P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Medicine, Lithuanian University
of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania.

OBJECTIVE: As an excessive gaming is the addiction of the 21th century, purpose
of our study was to investigate how sense of coherence interacts with gaming
time, choice of various games types, age and gender characteristics. Our task was
to evaluate relationship between computer gaming and an adolescent's sense of
coherence.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study based on a self-reported questionnaire was
performed among the representative samples of 1,806 adolescents aged 13-18 years.
Adolescents reported the amount of time spent gaming computer games, types of
games, as well as sense of coherence. The relations between the choice of
computer games type, time spent gaming computer games and sense of coherence of
respondents were assessed by odds ratio using multivariate regression analysis.
RESULTS: 32.9% of boys and 81.1% of girls reported gaming computer games less
than 5 hours per day during the last month (p < 0.001). 30.9% of boys and 4.1% of
girls reported gaming computer games more than 10 hours per day during the last
month (p < 0.001). Boys and girls aged 13-15 with a weak sense of coherence had
significantly higher probability to play action or combat computer games for 5 or
more hours per day in comparison to the respondents who had a strong sense of
coherence. Also, this probability was 2 times higher among boys than among girls.
CONCLUSION: Sense of coherence is a useful tool to identify adolescents who are
at risk of excessive gaming. Game playing time is linked to the sense of
coherence. Adolescent with a weak sense of coherence had a higher probability to 
play more times, especially in younger age.

DOI: 10.21101/cejph.a4731 
PMID: 30419624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Pak Med Assoc. 2018 Nov;68(11):1727-1728.

Seven Sinful Sisters: Seven Smart Solutions to Stop Diabetes.

Kalra S(1), Kumar KH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Endocrinology, Bharti Hospital, Karnal, India.
(2)Dept of Endocrinology, R&R Hospital, New Delhi, India.

This article describes a Seven Sinful Sisters and Smart Solutions (FIVE S)
concept, which lists seven contributory factors of diabetes, and seven potential 
solutions to help prevent its spread. The Seven Sinful Sisters include Sugar,
Salt, Saturated fat, Spirits (alcohol), Sitting time (sedentary life style),
Steroids (including other drugs) and Stress. Seven Smart salutogenic Solutions
are use of Self-restraint, Small size portions, Spices (nutrition -based
remedies, including sugar and salt substitutes), Slimnastics (a synonym for
aerobic exercise), high Spirit (a positive attitude), health Sleep/Siesta, and
enjoyment of Sunday (or Stress management).


PMID: 30410162  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Aging Ment Health. 2019 Oct;23(10):1423-1432. doi: 10.1080/13607863.2018.1496225.
Epub 2018 Nov 8.

Social factors relating to depression among older people in Japan: analysis of
longitudinal panel data from the AGES project.

Misawa J(1), Kondo K(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Health Care Services Management, Department of Social Medicine, 
Nihon University School of Medicine , Tokyo , Japan.
(2)b Center for Preventive Medical Sciences, Chiba University , Chiba , Japan.
(3)c Department of Gerontology and Evaluation Study, Center for Gerontology and
Social Science, National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology , Aichi , Japan.

Objectives: Preventing the onset of depression among older people in Japan
requires clarifying the social determinants of depression by using longitudinal
data, while also taking biological and psychological factors into account.
Identification of such determinants may enable more active intervention through
social policy. We aimed to reveal the social factors related to depression in
Japan's older people and consider associated policy implications. Method: Panel
data obtained from a longitudinal survey (Wave 1 to Wave 2) of 3464 elderly
subjects, aged 65 years or more, as part of the Aichi Gerontological Evaluation
Study (AGES) project was employed. The outcome variable was depression, as
evaluated by the Geriatric Depression Scale. Frequency of meeting with friends,
social support, hobbies, participation in organizations, life events, illness,
self-rated health, instrumental activities of daily living, and sense of
coherence were entered as explanatory variables within a logit model for each
gender. Results: Of the subjects without mental illness or depression at Wave 1, 
14% had become depressed by Wave 2. In both men and women, life events predicted 
increased odds of depression, while sense of coherence predicted reduced odds.
The frequency of meeting with friends, hobbies, and self-rated health predicted
reduced odds of depression in men, while age predicted increased odds in women.
Conclusion: Overall, social interaction is important for preventing depression in
Japan, and that the establishment of a system capable of promoting social
interaction and providing care to the elderly during life events may be a useful 
social policy approach to preventing depression.

DOI: 10.1080/13607863.2018.1496225 
PMID: 30406670  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Adv Nurs. 2019 Mar;75(3):683-691. doi: 10.1111/jan.13905. Epub 2019 Jan 10.

An mHealth intervention programme to promote healthy behaviours and prevent
adolescent obesity (TeenPower): A study protocol.

Sousa P(1)(2), Duarte E(3), Ferreira R(4), Esperança A(5), Frontini R(2),
Santos-Rocha R(6)(7), Luís L(1)(2), Dias SS(1)(2)(8), Marques N(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, Leiria, Portugal.
(2)Centre for Innovative Care and Health Technology, Polytechnic Institute of
Leiria, Castelo Branco, Portugal.
(3)School of Health Sciences Dr. Lopes Dias, Polytechnic Institute of Castelo
Branco, Castelo Branco, Portugal.
(4)CIIS-UCP, UI-IPSantarém, School of Health Sciences, Polytechnic Institute of
Santarém, Santarem, Portugal.
(5)Câmara Municipal de Leiria, Leiria, Portugal.
(6)Sport Sciences School of Rio Maior, Polytechnic Institute of Santarém,
Santarem, Portugal.
(7)Neuromechanics of Human Movement Group, Interdisciplinary Centre for the Study
of Human Performance, Faculty of Human Kinetics, University of Lisbon, Lisbon,
Portugal.
(8)EpiDoC Unit, CEDOC, NOVA Medical School, Universidade Nova de Lisboa
(NMS-UNL), Lisboa, Portugal.
(9)Design and Arts Research Lab (LIDA), Observatory on Inclusion and
Accessibility in Action (iACT) - CICS.NOVA.IPLeiria, Leiria, Portugal.
(10)School of Arts and Design (ESAD.CR), Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, Leiria,
Portugal.

AIM: This paper describes the design and rationale of multicenter practice-based 
research that aims to develop and evaluate an innovative mobile health (mHealth) 
intervention programme directed to promote healthy behaviours and prevent
adolescent obesity.
DESIGN: This study is designed as a non-randomized controlled trial with a
three-arm structure.
METHODS: Twelve to 16 years old participants will be recruited from schools, with
access to the Internet and smartphone/tablet devices. The intervention group will
be invited to engage in the TeenPower mHealth programme and divided into two
subgroups: Group A (additionally engaged in a structured school-based
intervention programme) and Group B (only engaged in the mHealth programme). The 
mHealth app includes educational resources, self-monitoring, social support,
interactive training modules and motivational tools. The control group will only 
follow the structured school-based intervention programme. The intervention
length will be 3 months, including the direct support of an interdisciplinary
team (nursing, nutrition, sports, psychology, among others). This research was
approved and funded in August 2017.
DISCUSSION: The positive evaluation of the intervention programme will stimulate 
the inclusion of technologies in the promotion of salutogenic behaviours and
obesity prevention.
IMPACT: Adolescent obesity reached epidemic proportions. It is urgent to find
effective prevention strategies to induce change at the individual, family and
community level. If effective, this protocol can be used by health and exercise
professionals in improving community interventions tailored to teenagers.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jan.13905 
PMID: 30397934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Work. 2018;61(2):327-336. doi: 10.3233/WOR-182803.

The association between subordinate perception of task and relation oriented
leadership behaviors and sense of coherence among a sample of Swedish
white-collar workers.

Svensson S(1), Stubbs J(2), Larsson J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Musculoskeletal Research, Department of Occupational and Public
Health Science, University of Gavle, Gavle, Sweden.
(2)Nordic Occupationnal Safety and Rehabilitation, Rancho Cordova, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests that leadership behaviors and sense of coherence
(SOC) influences subordinate health. However, this has not been investigated in
any detail.
OBJECTIVES: To study the association between leadership behaviors and SOC. It was
hypothesized that both task and relation oriented leadership behaviors would be
positively associated with SOC, whereas a laissez-faire leadership would be
negatively associated with SOC.
METHODS: This is a cross-sectional quantitative study of managers and
subordinates in a large governmental organization. The study used two common and 
empirically tested leadership styles: task oriented leadership and relation
oriented leadership. In a logistic regression analysis, the association between
types of leadership behavior and SOC were analyzed while controlling for age,
gender, income, type of employment and organizational tenure.
RESULTS: Neither task oriented or relation oriented leadership behavior were
significantly associated with SOC.
CONCLUSIONS: The result indicates that the type of leadership behavior exercised 
is not directly associated with subordinate's SOC. In future studies the
importance of subordinate leadership preferences should be acknowledged. More
research is needed to reach an understanding as to the nature of and the
potential of this mechanism.

DOI: 10.3233/WOR-182803 
PMID: 30373982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Health Psychol Behav Med. 2018 Oct 29;6(1):329-339. doi:
10.1080/21642850.2018.1538802.

The relation between sense of coherence and daily hassles among university
students.

Hochwälder J(1), Saied V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Mälardalens University, Eskilstuna, Sweden.

Based on Antonovsky's salutogenic model, it was hypothesized that persons with a 
high sense of coherence (SOC), compared to persons with a low SOC, (1) experience
fewer hassles and (2) experience hassles as less stressful. In addition to each
of the two main hypotheses, gender differences and interaction between SOC and
gender were also explored. Two hundred and fifty-eight female students
(Mage = 23.77 years) and 136 male students (Mage = 24.02 years) participated in a
survey where they responded to a questionnaire that was designed to measure some 
demographic variables, SOC and daily hassles. The data were analysed by two 3
(SOC-groups) × 2 (Gender) ANOVAs for independent measures, with frequency and
intensity as dependent variables, followed up with Tukey's HSD post-hoc tests.
The results confirmed both main hypotheses. In addition, the results showed no
interaction between SOC and gender, no differences between female and male
students with regard to the number of experienced hassles but that female
students experienced the hassles more intensively. These findings further
corroborated the two fundamental parts of Antonovsky's salutogenic model
concerned with avoidance and appraisal of stressors.

© 2018 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor &
Francis Group.

DOI: 10.1080/21642850.2018.1538802 
PMCID: PMC8114344
PMID: 34040835 

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported by
the authors.


239. Paediatr Respir Rev. 2019 Feb;29:14-18. doi: 10.1016/j.prrv.2018.09.003. Epub
2018 Sep 20.

A shared vision of quality of life: Partnering in decision-making to understand
families' realities.

Gorgos A(1), Ghosh S(2), Payot A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill University
Health Center, 1001 Decarie, Montreal, Quebec H3H 3J1, Canada. Electronic
address: andreea.gorgos@muhc.mcgill.ca.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill University
Health Center, 1001 Decarie, Montreal, Quebec H3H 3J1, Canada. Electronic
address: shuvo.ghosh@muhc.mcgill.ca.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Neonatology Division, Clinical Ethics Unit,
Palliative Care Unit, CHU Sainte Justine, Université de Montréal, 3175 Chemin de 
la Côte-Sainte-Catherine, Montreal, Quebec H3T 1C5, Canada. Electronic address:
antoine.payot@umontreal.ca.

Quality of life (QOL) measures are increasingly used when important
prognostication and treatment decisions need to be made in the care of a
critically ill child. Unfortunately, health-care professionals and families
experience difficulties when attempting to accurately predict and estimate QOL
for a patient. Aspects such as subjectivity, complexity and adaptation to illness
play an important role in how QOL is ultimately experienced. This often leads to 
inaccurate estimates of QOL, when performed by individuals other than the
patient, such as clinicians or family members. In order to make decisions in the 
best interest of the patient, a partnership between families and clinicians must 
be fostered, based on communication, trust and mutual understanding of values.
This article will attempt to describe some of the challenges that come into play 
when assessing QOL for a patient and will provide tools for building a
clinician-family partnership in the decision-making process.

Crown Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prrv.2018.09.003 
PMID: 30366651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Caries Res. 2019;53(3):314-321. doi: 10.1159/000493537. Epub 2018 Oct 25.

The Association between Sense of Coherence and Dental Caries in Low Social Status
Schoolchildren.

Tomazoni F(1), Vettore MV(2), Mendes FM(3), Ardenghi TM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, Faculty of Dentistry, Federal University of Santa
Maria, Santa Maria, Brazil.
(2)Academic Unit of Oral Health, Dentistry and Society, School of Clinical
Dentistry, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Orthodontics and Pediatric Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry,
Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Department of Stomatology, Faculty of Dentistry, Federal University of Santa
Maria, Santa Maria, Brazil, thiardenghi@hotmail.com.

The relationship between dental caries and sense of coherence (SOC) has not been 
substantiated in children and adolescents, particularly among those with a low
socioeconomic status. The aim of this study was to investigate the association
between SOC and dental caries in schoolchildren from a low socioeconomic
background. A random sample of 356 8- to 14-year-old schoolchildren enrolled in
public schools from the poorest region of Santa Maria, a southern city in Brazil,
was selected. Dental examinations were performed to assess dental plaque and
dental caries (DMF-S and dmf-s indexes). The children's SOC was assessed using a 
validated Brazilian version of the SOC-13 scale. Socioeconomic, demographic, and 
behavioral data were collected from parents using a questionnaire. Multilevel
Poisson regression analysis was used following a hierarchical approach to
investigate the association between the SOC and DMF-T + dmf-t mean. Children
whose mothers had studied for 8 years or less (RR 1.30; 95% CI 1.08-1.57) and
children with dental plaque (RR 1.29; 95% CI 1.06-1.58) presented with higher
DMF-T scores than their counterparts (p < 0.05). A higher household income (RR
0.66; 95% CI 0.51-0.84) and greater SOC scores (RR 0.71, 95% CI 0.56-0.90) were
associated with lower DMF-T in children (p < 0.05). Children's SOC seems to be a 
relevant protective psychosocial factor for dental caries experience in socially 
vulnerable children.

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000493537 
PMID: 30359970  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Health Promot Int. 2019 Dec 1;34(6):1200-1206. doi: 10.1093/heapro/day088.

Research supervision as a mutual learning process: introducing salutogenesis into
supervision using 'The Collegial Model'.

Eriksson M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University West, Gustava Melinsgata 2,
Trollhättan 46186, Sweden.

Research using salutogenic factors to promote health is extensive. Salutogenesis,
and its core concept 'sense of coherence' (SOC), is a resource-oriented theory
and framework, applicable in different contexts. Research combining health
promotion and doctoral supervision in higher education is scarce. This article
places research supervision in a broader context of sustainable working life by
focusing on stress management. It is about health promotion in an area of
research supervision, a new approach not described earlier. Research on
supervision in general is extensive, focusing on co-generative mentoring,
counselling and coaching. A new salutogenic model, 'The Collegial Model', is
presented as an example of practical application. The aim of the present article 
is to introduce and discuss how the salutogenic theory and model of health can be
applied to research supervision of postgraduate students. Knowledge about how SOC
impacts health and learning has benefit from a systematic review on salutogenic
research covering published papers from 1992 to 2003 and until today. 'The
Collegial Model' examines fundamental characteristics of supervision related to
ethics and sense of coherence: relations, communication, processes, reciprocity, 
reflection, learning, comprehensibility, manageability, meaningfulness and
coherence. Principles for carrying out supervision 'the salutogenic way' are
suggested. The conclusion is that doctoral supervision involves mutual learning
processes between colleagues in the supervisory team. Supervision has to be
theory driven, implying that supervisors could benefit from applying a
salutogenic way of thinking and working, particularly in development of
guidelines for research supervision.

© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/day088 
PMID: 30357371  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Int J Paediatr Dent. 2019 Jan;29(1):36-42. doi: 10.1111/ipd.12435. Epub 2018 Oct 
22.

Adolescent with caries and experienced interaction with dental staff.

Mattila ML(1)(2), Rautava P(1)(3), Saarinen M(4)(5), Tolvanen M(6)(7), Ojanlatva 
A(8), Jaakkola S(1)(2), Aromaa M(1)(9), Sillanpää M(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(2)Oral Health Care, City of Turku Welfare Division, Turku, Finland.
(3)Turku Clinical Research Centre, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland.
(4)Department of Child Neurology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(5)Department of General Practice, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(6)Department of Community Dentistry, Institute of Dentistry, University of
Turku, Turku, Finland.
(7)Finn Brain Study Group, Department of Psychiatry and Turku Brain and Mind
Center, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(8)Department of Teacher Education, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(9)Child and Adolescent Clinic, City of Turku Welfare Division, Turku, Finland.

BACKGROUND: There is a lack of studies about how adolescents experience the
interaction during dental visits. The experienced interaction during dental
visits will influence how adolescents take care of their oro-dental health, and
how they attend at the dentist's office.
AIM: To explore the interaction experiences during dental visits of 18-year-olds 
with or without a history of caries.
DESIGN: The dental health status at age 15 years was used as a predictor of
subsequent interaction experiences with the dental staff. The dental health
status was assessed by the Decayed Missed Filled Teeth index and interaction
experiences by the Patient Dental Staff Interaction Questionnaire.
RESULTS: Adolescents with a history of caries experienced the interaction at
dental visits significantly more often negatively than adolescents with healthy
teeth. The association was significant after adjustment for potential confounding
factors (sense of coherence, gender, and duration of maternal basic education).
CONCLUSIONS: Understanding, encouraging, and appropriate interaction with
adolescents with caries may make patients more positive and receptive for
treatment and self-care.

© 2018 BSPD, IAPD and John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ipd.12435 
PMID: 30350432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


243. BMC Health Serv Res. 2018 Oct 19;18(1):795. doi: 10.1186/s12913-018-3619-3.

Implementing large-scale health system strengthening interventions: experience
from the better health outcomes through mentoring and assessments (BHOMA) project
in Zambia.

Mutale W(1), Cleary S(2), Olivier J(2), Chilengi R(3), Gilson L(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Zambia School of Medicine, Box 50110, Lusaka, Zambia.
wmutale@yahoo.com.
(2)University of Cape Town, School of Public Health and Family Medicine, Cape
Town, South Africa.
(3)Centre for Infections Disease Research in Zambia, Box 34681, Lusaka, Zambia.

BACKGROUND: Under the Doris Duke Charitable Foundation's African Health
Initiative, five Population Health Implementation and Training partnerships were 
established as long-term health system strengthening projects in five Sub-Saharan
Countries. In Zambia, the Centre for Infectious Disease Research in Zambia began 
to implement the Better Health Outcomes through Mentorship and Assessments
(BHOMA) in 2009. This was a combined community and health systems project
involving 42 public facilities and their catchment populations. The impact of
this intervention is reported elsewhere, but less attention has been paid to
evaluation approaches that generate an understanding of the forces shaping the
intervention. This paper is focused on understanding the implementation practices
of the BHOMA intervention in Zambia.
METHODS: Qualitative approaches were employed to understand and explain health
systems intervention implementation practices between 2014 and 2016. We
purposively sampled six clinics out of the 42 that participated in the BHOMA
project within three districts of Lusaka province in Zambia. At the
facility-level we targeted health centre in-charges, health workers, and
community health workers. In-depth interviews (n = 22), focus group discussions
(n = 3) and observations were also collected and synthesised.
RESULTS: The major health system challenges addressed by the BHOMA project
included poor infrastructure, lack of human resources, poor service delivery,
long distances to health centres and inadequate health information systems. In
order to implement this in the districts it was necessary to engage with the
Ministry of Health and district managers, however, these partners were not
actively engaged in intervention design There was great variation in perceptions 
about the BHOMA interventions. The implementation team considered BHOMA as a
'proof of concept pilot project', running parallel to the public health system,
while district health officials from the Ministry of health understood it as a
'long term partner' and were therefore resistant to the short-term nature of the 
intervention.
CONCLUSIONS: The Normalization Process Theory provided a useful framework to
understand and explain implementation processes for the BHOMA intervention in
Zambia. We clearly demonstrated the applicability of all the four main components
of the NPT: coherence (or sense-making); cognitive participation (or engagement);
collective action and reflexive monitoring. We demonstrated how complex and
dynamic the intervention played out among different actors and how implementation
was affected by difference in appreciation and interpretation of the goal of the 
intervention. Our findings support the growing demand for process evaluations to 
use theory based approaches to examine how context interact with local
interventions to affect outcomes intended or not.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01942278 . Registered:
September 13, 2013 (Retrospectively registered).

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-018-3619-3 
PMCID: PMC6195702
PMID: 30340583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Gac Sanit. 2019 Jul - Aug;33(4):398-400. doi: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2018.06.014. Epub 
2018 Oct 15.

[The demedicalisation of women's daily lives: socio-educational groups in the
Andalusian Public Health System].

[Article in Spanish]

Iáñez Domínguez A(1), Álvarez Pérez R(2), García-Cubillana de la Cruz P(3), Luque
Ribelles V(4), Morales Marente E(5), Palacios Gálvez MS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Trabajo Social y Servicios Sociales, Facultad de Ciencias
Sociales, Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Sevilla, España. Electronic address:
aiadom@upo.es.
(2)Departamento de Trabajo Social y Servicios Sociales, Facultad de Ciencias
Sociales, Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Sevilla, España.
(3)Consejería de Salud, Junta de Andalucía, Sevilla, España.
(4)Departamento de Psicología, Facultad de Ciencias de la Educación, Universidad 
de Cádiz, Cádiz, España.
(5)Departamento de Psicología Social, Evolutiva y de la Educación, Facultad de
Educación, Psicología y Ciencias del Deporte, Universidad de Huelva, Huelva,
España.

The socio-educational groups (GRUSE) are a health and emotional well-being
promotion strategy, from an asset-based positive health approach. They
principally target women who attend health centres with signs of discomfort with 
no organic basis finding. The strategy was evaluated through a quasi-experimental
longitudinal design, with a mixed methodology. Information was collected from 228
women with a battery of scales and from an analysis of health system databases.
Ten in-depth interviews with women were conducted, and 3 discussion groups with
professionals. The aim of this article was to introduce the GRUSE strategy as a
non-medical alternative intervention and to present the research design, seeking 
to identify the evidence of this practice implemented in primary health centres
of Andalusia (Spain).

Copyright © 2018 SESPAS. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2018.06.014 
PMID: 30337181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Adv Neurobiol. 2018;21:219-245. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-94593-4_8.

Synaptic Plasticity and Synchrony in the Anterior Cingulate Cortex Circuitry: A
Neural Network Approach to Causality of Chronic Visceral Pain and Associated
Cognitive Deficits.

Li Y(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong
Kong. yingli@cityu.edu.hk.
(2)Centre for Biosystems, Neuroscience, and Nanotechnology, City University of
Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong. yingli@cityu.edu.hk.
(3)School of Veterinary Medicine, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong
Kong. yingli@cityu.edu.hk.

Human brain imaging studies have demonstrated the importance of cortical neuronal
networks in the perception of pain in patients with functional bowel disease such
as irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).Studies have identified an enhanced response in
the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) to colorectal distension in viscerally
hypersensitive (VH) rats. Electrophysiological recordings show long-lasting
potentiation of local field potential (LFP) in the medial thalamus (MT)-ACC
synapses in VH rats. Theta burst stimulation in the MT reliably induced long-term
potentiation (LTP) in the MT-ACC pathway in normal rats, but was occluded in the 
VH state. Further, repeated tetanization of MT increased ACC neuronal activity
and visceral pain responses of normal rats, mimicking VH rats. These data provide
conclusive evidence that chronic visceral pain is associated with alterations of 
synaptic plasticity in the ACC circuitry. The ACC synaptic strengthening may
engage signal transduction pathways that are in common with those activated by
electrical stimulation, and serve as an attractive cellular model of functional
visceral pain.Evidences have shown that most patients with IBS have psychiatric
comorbidity. Using rat gambling task (RGT), we discovered an impairment of
decision-making behavior in VH rats. Electrophysiological study showed a
reduction of LTP in the basolateral amygdala (BLA)-ACC synapses in VH rats.
Multiple-electrode array recordings of local field potential (LFP) in freely
behaving rats revealed that chronic visceral pain led to disruption of ACC spike 
timing and BLA local theta oscillation. Finally, cross-correlation analysis
revealed that VH was associated with suppressed synchronization of theta
oscillation between the BLA and ACC, indicating reduced neuronal communications
between these two regions. These data suggest that functional disturbances in
BLA-ACC neural circuitry may be relevant causes for the deficits in
decision-making in chronic pain state.The viscero-sensation is a faculty of
perception that does not depend upon any outward sense, but acts to influence the
elicited behavioral response. Clinically, vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) has shown
several beneficial effects for mood enhancement. Our recent study characterized
that VNS facilitates decision-making and unveiled several important roles for VNS
in regulating LFP and spike phases, as well as enhancing spike-phase coherence
between key brain areas involved in cognitive performance.It is conceivable that 
the visceral pain experience may be better explained as a biopsychosocial model
of pain and reflected in a matrix of neuronal structures. Understanding of
desynchrony in the ACC network and cognitive deficits is likely to provide
exciting and powerful future treatment for chronic visceral pain related
debilitating mood, anxiety, and cognitive disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-94593-4_8 
PMID: 30334224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Psychother Psychosom Med Psychol. 2019 Jul;69(7):293-300. doi:
10.1055/a-0668-1206. Epub 2018 Oct 16.

[Resilience, Fear of Progression and Psychosocial Distress in Patients with
Breast Cancer and Gynecological Tumors Seeking a Second Opinion].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Krebs J(1), Wasner S(2), Egloffstein S(3), Lux MP(2), Morawa E(1), Beckmann
MW(2), Erim Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Psychosomatische und Psychotherapeutische Abteilung, Universitätsklinikum
Erlangen.
(2)Frauenklinik, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, CCC Erlangen-EMN,
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg.
(3)CCC Erlangen-EMN, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen.

PURPOSE: The objective of the study was to find out about psychological distress,
fear of progression, and resilience levels in patients with breast cancer and
gynecological tumors asking for a second opinion concerning their oncological
treatment.
METHODS: 158 female cancer patients were assessed for those parameters in a
questionnaire survey comprising SOC-13, FoP-Q-SF, and the NCCN distress
thermometer.
RESULTS: 16.2% of the breast cancer patients and 20.5% of the patients with
gynecological tumors suffered from dysfunctional fear of progression, 70.4% of
the breast cancer patients and 80.6% of the patients with gynecological tumors
were highly distressed. The patients did not differ significantly in their
resilience levels from a representative sample of the general population.
DISCUSSION: Strong disease-related fear and distress were found in participating 
patients seeking a second medical opinion.
CONCLUSIONS: Further study of the connection between psychological variables and 
the decision for a second oncological opinion seems crucial concerning
implications for doctor-patient-communication.

Publisher: Das Ziel der Studie war es zu erfassen, wie psychische Belastungen,
Progredienzangst und Resilienz bei Patientinnen mit einem Mamma- oder
gynäkologischem Malignom, die eine Zweitmeinung bezüglich ihrer onkologischen
Behandlung einholen, ausgeprägt sind.Bei 158 Patientinnen wurden psychische
Belastungen (NCCN Distress Thermometer), Kohärenzgefühl (SOC-13) und
Progredienzangst (PA-F-KF) erhoben.16,2% der Brustkrebspatientinnen und 20,5% der
Patientinnen mit gynäkologischen Tumoren litten unter dysfunktionaler
Progredienzangst, 70,4% der Brustkrebspatientinnen und 80,6% der Patientinnen mit
gynäkologischen Tumoren unter hohem Distress. Die Patientinnen unterschieden sich
hinsichtlich ihrer Resilienz jedoch nicht signifikant von einer
bevölkerungsrepräsentativen Stichprobe.In der untersuchten Gruppe der
Zweitmeinungs-Patientinnen waren krankheitsbezogene Ängste und psychische
Belastungen stark ausgeprägt.Im Hinblick auf Implikationen für die
Arzt-Patienten-Kommunikation erscheint eine weitere wissenschaftliche
Beschäftigung mit der Bedeutung psychologischer Variablen beim Einholen
onkologischer Zweitmeinungen angezeigt.
© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-0668-1206 
PMID: 30326537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Die Autoren geben an, dass kein
Interessenkonflikt besteht.


247. Sci Total Environ. 2019 Feb 15;651(Pt 2):2118-2129. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.09.030. Epub 2018 Sep 5.

Research challenges for cultural ecosystem services and public health in
(peri-)urban environments.

Chen X(1), de Vries S(2), Assmuth T(3), Dick J(4), Hermans T(5), Hertel O(6),
Jensen A(7), Jones L(8), Kabisch S(9), Lanki T(10), Lehmann I(11), Maskell L(12),
Norton L(13), Reis S(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Landscape Ecology, Norwegian Institute for Nature Research, C/o 
NINA, Gaustadalleen 21, 0349 Oslo, Norway. Electronic address:
xianwen.chen@nina.no.
(2)Wageningen Environmental Research, Wageningen University & Research, PO Box
47, 6700AA Wageningen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: sjerp.devries@wur.nl.
(3)Finnish Environment Institute (SYKE), P.O. Box 140, FI-00251 Helsinki,
Finland. Electronic address: timo.assmuth@ymparisto.fi.
(4)Centre for Ecology & Hydrology, Bush Estate, Penicuik, Midlothian EH26 0QB,
UK. Electronic address: jand@ceh.ac.uk.
(5)Wageningen Environmental Research, Wageningen University & Research, PO Box
47, 6700AA Wageningen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: tia.hermans@wur.nl.
(6)Department of Environmental Science - Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics
(Atmospheric Processes) (ATPRO), Aarhus University, Frederiksborgvej 399,
building 7413, D1.21, 4000 Roskilde, Denmark. Electronic address: oh@envs.au.dk.
(7)Department of Environmental Science - Enviromental Social Science, Aarhus
University, Frederiksborgvej 399, building 7420, K1.13, 4000 Roskilde, Denmark.
Electronic address: aj@envs.au.dk.
(8)Centre for Ecology & Hydrology, Environment Centre Wales, Deiniol Road,
Bangor, Gwynedd LL57 2UW, UK. Electronic address: lj@ceh.ac.uk.
(9)Department of Urban and Environmental Sociology, Helmholtz Centre for
Environmental Research - UFZ, Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany.
Electronic address: sigrun.kabisch@ufz.de.
(10)Department of Health Security, National Institute for Health and Welfare
(THL), P.O. Box 95, FI-70701 Kuopio, Finland; Institute of Public Health and
Clinical Nutrition, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland. Electronic
address: timo.lanki@thl.fi.
(11)Berlin Institute of Health, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
Germany. Electronic address: irina.lehmann@bihealth.de.
(12)Centre for Ecology & Hydrology, Lancaster Environment Centre, Library Avenue,
Bailrigg, Lancaster LA1 4AP, UK. Electronic address: lcma@ceh.ac.uk.
(13)Centre for Ecology & Hydrology, Lancaster Environment Centre, Library Avenue,
Bailrigg, Lancaster LA1 4AP, UK. Electronic address: lrn@ceh.ac.uk.
(14)Centre for Ecology & Hydrology, Bush Estate, Penicuik, Midlothian EH26 0QB,
UK; University of Exeter Medical School, Knowledge Spa, Truro TR1 3HD, UK.
Electronic address: srei@ceh.ac.uk.

Urbanization is a global trend, and consequently the quality of urban
environments is increasingly important for human health and wellbeing. Urban
life-style is typically associated with low physical activity and sometimes with 
high mental stress, both contributing to an increasing burden of diseases.
Nature-based solutions that make effective use of ecosystem services,
particularly of cultural ecosystem services (CES), can provide vital building
blocks to address these challenges. This paper argues that, the salutogenic, i.e.
health-promoting effects of CES have so far not been adequately recognised and
deserve more explicit attention in order to enhance decision making around health
and wellbeing in urban areas. However, a number of research challenges will need 
to be addressed to reveal the mechanisms, which underpin delivery of urban CES.
These include: causal chains of supply and demand, equity, and equality of public
health benefits promoted. Methodological challenges in quantifying these are
discussed. The paper is highly relevant for policy makers within and beyond
Europe, and also serves as a review for current researchers and as a roadmap to
future short- and long-term research opportunities.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.09.030 
PMID: 30321733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Am Indian Alsk Native Ment Health Res. 2018;25(3):1-25. doi:
10.5820/aian.2503.2018.1.

Exploring the Relationship between Sense of Coherence and Historical Trauma among
American Indian Youth.

Evans W, Davis B.

Historical trauma has been associated with many health and social issues.
However, there is little understanding of how American Indian (AI) youth cope
with historical trauma. Sense of Coherence (SOC) provides a promising framework
for studying the relationship between resiliency and historical trauma, as it is 
a theorized mechanism that helps individuals cope with ongoing stress. A
multi-method study examining the potential relationship between SOC and
historical trauma revealed that higher levels of SOC predicted fewer historical
trauma-related symptoms and provided rich detail about how an AI youth sample
conceptualized stress and coping. Implications and future directions are
discussed.

DOI: 10.5820/aian.2503.2018.1 
PMID: 30320874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Front Psychol. 2018 Sep 25;9:1612. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01612. eCollection
2018.

Drawing on the Arts to Enhance Salutogenic Coping With Health-Related Stress and 
Loss.

Huss E(1), Samson T(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Charlotte B. and Jack J. Spitzer Department of Social Work, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel.

The connection between art therapy and specific theories of positive psychology
such as Antonovsky's theory of salutogenic sense of coherence (SOC) has been less
articulated in the literature. This paper draws a methodological connection
between art therapy and SOC, that is, meaning, manageability and
comprehensibility, as the components of coping. This theoretical and
methodological connection is then explored with a group of participants dealing
with the health-stress of cancer. Method: We conducted a large-scale, qualitative
study that included fifty transcribed hours of thematically analyzed arts
processes and one hundred art works, used to explore salutogenic theory within a 
support group for recovering oncological patients. Results: The results point to 
the arts as including mechanisms that enhance meaning, manageability, and
comprehensibility in an embodied and synergetic way. The art makes it possible
both to separate and to 'fill' these three components, while on the other hand,
integrating them into a cyclical element. We outline theoretical and
methodological implications of understanding art therapy as a methodology to
enact and concretize positive psychology theories, as well as presenting a
protocol for using arts to enhance salutogenic coping in the context of
health-related stress.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01612 
PMCID: PMC6167555
PMID: 30319472 


250. Eur J Phys Rehabil Med. 2019 Apr;55(2):183-190. doi:
10.23736/S1973-9087.18.05240-1. Epub 2018 Oct 10.

Comparison of three scales to evaluate personality traits in Parkinson's disease:
which one to use?

Gison A(1), Bonassi S(2), Rizza F(3), Giaquinto S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Rehabilitation, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Rome,
Italy - annalisa.gison@sanraffaele.it.
(2)Unit of Clinical and Molecular Epidemiology, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Rome, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Neurological Rehabilitation, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Rome,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Personality traits have gained interest in the field of disability
and stress, because they may either prompt or deny compliance. They can also
foster motivation and influence outcome. Parkinson disease (PD) is a disabling
and stressful condition that requires coping strategies and rehabilitation plans.
Three constructs and their relative scales have been a matter of investigation,
namely dispositional optimism (DO), locus-of-control (LOC), and
sense-of-coherence (SOC).
AIM: The present study compared the psychometric properties of three constructs
in Parkinson's disease (PD). The health-related variables were: emotional
distress (ED), quality of life (HR-QoL) and activities of daily living (ADL). The
final objective was to provide guidance on scale selection to be implemented in
clinical protocols.
DESIGN: A cross sectional study.
SETTING: Community-based general physicians.
POPULATION: Participants with PD (N.=84) from community-based general physicians.
METHODS: PD patients completed 3 self-report scales, namely Life Orientation
Test-Revised (LOT-R, measuring Dispositional Optimism), Internal and External
Locus Of Control (LOC-int. LOC-ext) and Sense of Coherence (SOC). All
participants had magnetic resonance imaging. The MDS-UPDRS and the Barthel Scale 
were compiled by the investigator with the assistance of a caregiver.
RESULTS: LOC-ext was the only scale to be associated with PD severity and
disability (P<0.05). A higher level of LOC-ext was also associated with a higher 
level of ED (P<0.005). LOT-R was inversely associated with ED. Subjects in the
highest tertile had a 41% lower ED (P<0.001). SOC was also inversely associated
with degree of ED. Subjects in the highest tertile have a 44% lower ED (P<0.01). 
Moreover, HR-QoL is associated with several parameters, but LOT-R is the one with
the strongest association (P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: DO and SOC are predictive of important end-points, namely HR-QoL and
ED. DO is even better under this respect. Conversely, those clinicians who are
more interested in motor problems may find LOC more suitable. DO may be the most 
efficient construct to use in PD because of its favorable psychometric
properties.
CLINICAL REHABILITATION IMPACT: DO, LOC and SOC are constructs to be implemented 
in both research and clinical PD protocols. It is recommended to implement these,
because they have predictive value especially when HR-QoL and ED are studied.

DOI: 10.23736/S1973-9087.18.05240-1 
PMID: 30311492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Minerva Ginecol. 2018 Dec;70(6):687-699. doi: 10.23736/S0026-4784.18.04327-7.
Epub 2018 Oct 5.

Optimal settings for childbirth.

Setola N(1), Iannuzzi L(2), Santini M(3), Cocina GG(4), Naldi E(5), Branchini
L(6), Morano S(7), Escuriet Peiró R(8), Downe S(9).

Author information: 
(1)TESIS Center, Department of Architecture, University of Florence, Florence,
Italy - nicoletta.setola@unifi.it.
(2)Physiological Pregnancy Pathway and Margherita Birth Center, Department of
Health Care Professions, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Health Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(4)Department of Architecture and Design, Polytechnic University of Turin, Turin,
Italy.
(5)Department of Architecture, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(6)MondoDonna Onlus, Association for Support and Integration of Immigrant
Populations and Vulnerable Women, Bologna, Italy.
(7)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics and
Maternal-Infant Sciences (DINOGMI), University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(8)Catalan Health Service, Generalitat de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Research in Childbirth and Health Unit (ReaCH), School of Community Health and
Midwifery, University of Central Lancashire, Preston, UK.

Many studies highlight how health is influenced by the settings in which people
live, work, and receive health care. In particular, the setting in which
childbirth takes place is highly influential. The physiological processes of
women's labor and birth are enhanced in optimal ("salutogenic," or health
promoting) environments. Settings can also make a difference in the way maternity
staff practice. This paper focuses on how positive examples of Italian birth
places incorporate principles of healthy settings. The "Margherita" Birth Center 
in Florence and the Maternity Home "Il Nido" in Bologna were purposively selected
as cases where the physical-environmental setting seemed to reflect an embedded
model of care that promotes health in the context of childbirth. Narrative
accounts of the project design were collected from lead professional and direct
inspections performed to elicit the key salutogenic components of the physical
layout. Comparisons between cases with a standard hospital labor ward layout were
performed. Cross-case similarities emerged. The physical characteristics mostly
related to optimal settings were a result of collaborative design decisions with 
stakeholders and users, and the resulting local intention to maximize safe
physiological birth, psychosocial wellbeing, facilitate movement and relaxation, 
prioritize space for privacy, intimacy, and favor human contact and
relationships. The key elements identified in this paper have the potential to
inform further investigations for the design or renovation of all birth places
(including hospitals) in order to optimize the salutogenic component of any
setting in any country.

DOI: 10.23736/S0026-4784.18.04327-7 
PMID: 30299042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Child Adolesc Psychiatr Nurs. 2018 Oct;31(2-3):79-86. doi: 10.1111/jcap.12212. 
Epub 2018 Oct 8.

Implementing a salutogenic treatment model in a clinical setting of emergency
child and adolescent psychiatry in Sweden.

Johansson BA(1)(2)(3), Pettersson K(4), Tydesten K(5), Lindgren A(6), Andersson
C(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Division of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, Clinical Health Promotion Centre, Lund
University, Malmö, Sweden.
(3)Regional Inpatient Care, Emergency Unit, Department of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
(4)Department of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, Outpatient Unit Ö/V, Skåne
University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Division of Psychiatry, Section of Adult Psychiatric
Health Care Lund, Eslöv, Sweden.
(6)Department of Mathematical Statistics, Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden.
(7)Department of Criminology, Faculty of Health and Society, Malmö University,
Malmö, Sweden.

PROBLEM: Emergency care in child and adolescent psychiatry often lacks a coherent
treatment model. This study reports on the development and implementation of a
salutogenic treatment model at the Child & Adolescent Psychiatric Emergency Unit 
in Malmö, Sweden.
METHODS: The development and implementation involved all staff categories and was
guided by a recognized authority on salutogenesis. Generalized resistance
resources (GRR) were identified that could be implemented at the unit to improve 
patients' sense of coherence.
FINDINGS: Eight GRR were developed and implemented at the unit. During the
6-month period following the implementation, patients (n = 41) and parents
reported satisfaction with the treatment, while mental health improved between
admission and discharge, and both treatment length and readmission rates were
reduced.
CONCLUSION: A salutogenic treatment model involving GRR seems to be a promising
approach in child and adolescent psychiatric emergency treatment.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/jcap.12212 
PMID: 30298629  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Community Psychol. 2019 Apr;47(3):517-528. doi: 10.1002/jcop.22135. Epub 2018
Oct 8.

Measuring national resilience: A new short version of the scale (NR-13).

Kimhi S(1), Eshel Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tel Hai College.

This article is aimed at describing and validating a new short version of the
National Resilience Scale (NR-13). The available 25-item National Resilience
Scale has been employed and validated by several studies. However, the present
data show that it can be substantially shortened without losing either its
reliability or its validity. The new short version of the scale has been examined
by the responses of an Israeli sample of adults (N = 1022). Results indicate, as 
expected, that national resilience promoting factors (community resilience and
sense of coherence) significantly and positively predict NR-13. A
resilience-suppressing factor (sense of danger) negatively and significantly
predicts NR-13. These predictions have been replicated in an additional sample of
Israeli higher education students (N = 423). These results support the
reliability and the validity of the short National Resilience Scale (NR-13).

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcop.22135 
PMID: 30295954  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Psychooncology. 2019 Jan;28(1):54-60. doi: 10.1002/pon.4909. Epub 2018 Oct 25.

Exploring the relationship between the body self and the sense of coherence in
women after surgical treatment for breast cancer.

Jabłoński MJ(1), Mirucka B(2), Streb J(3), Słowik AJ(3), Jach R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychology, Faculty of Philosophy, The Jesuit University
Ignatianum, Cracow, Poland.
(2)Department of General and Clinical Psychology, Faculty of Pedagogy and
Psychology, The University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland.
(3)Department of Oncology, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Cracow,
Poland.
(4)Department of Gynaecology and Oncology, Jagiellonian University Medical
College, Cracow, Poland.

OBJECTIVE: Analysis of the relationship between the body self (BS) and the sense 
of coherence (SOC) in women after breast surgery due to cancer in comparison with
a control group.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study in a group of 78 women using the body-self
questionnaire (BS-Q), and the life orientation questionnaire (SOC-29). Statistics
based on the IBM SPSS v.25.
RESULTS: Multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) has shown significant
differences based on groups in experiencing intimacy, manifesting femininity,
body acceptance, and manageability. In particular, manifesting femininity and
body acceptance showed a big effect size (0.30 < partial ɳ2  < 0.32). Correlation
analysis between the BS-Q and SOC-29 subscales and Fisher's r to z transformation
determines that the differences between groups were significant in favour of
healthy women in two sets of variables: experiencing intimacy/meaningfulness and 
attitude to food and weight/manageability.
CONCLUSIONS: Breast cancer survivors are at greater risk of developing decreased 
body acceptance and problems in intimacy, and have less correlation than the
healthy control group between manageability and meaningfulness with an
appropriate attitude to food and intimate relationship with their partner,
respectively. A higher manifestation of femininity in the treated group can be
considered a positive but socioculturally conditioned coping strategy.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pon.4909 
PMID: 30286514  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Front Psychiatry. 2018 Sep 19;9:440. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00440. eCollection
2018.

Mental Health in Anesthesiology and ICU Staff: Sense of Coherence Matters.

Schäfer SK(1), Lass-Hennemann J(1), Groesdonk H(2), Volk T(2), Bomberg H(2),
Staginnus M(1), Brückner AH(1), Holz E(1), Michael T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Department of Psychology,
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, Saarland University Medical
Center, Homburg, Germany.

Background: Hospitals, and particularly intensive care units (ICUs), are
demanding and stressful workplaces. Physicians and nurse staff are exposed to
various stressors: emergency situations, patients' deaths, and team conflicts.
Correspondingly, several studies describe increased rates of PTSD symptoms and
other mental health problems in hospital staff. Therefore, it is important to
identify factors that lower the risk of psychopathological symptoms. High levels 
of sense of coherence (SOC) and general resilience as well as an internal locus
of control (LOC) have already been identified as important health-benefitting
factors in medical staff. The current study aimed to evaluate their unique impact
in an ICU and an anesthesiology unit. Method: The cross-sectional online survey
investigated SOC, LOC, general resilience, general mental health problems as well
as PTSD symptoms in nurses and physicians within an ICU and an anesthesiology
unit (N = 52, 65.4% female). General mental health problems were assessed using
the ICD-10-Symptom-Rating (ISR) and PTSD symptoms were measured using the PTSD
Checklist for DSM-5 (PCL-5). The Sense of Coherence Scale (SOC-L9) assessed SOC, 
the Resilience Scale (RS-11) measured general resilience, and LOC was determined 
using a 4-item scale for the assessment of control beliefs (IE-4). Results: As
expected, SOC, r = -0.72, p < 0.001, general resilience, r = -0.46, p < 0.001,
and internal LOC, r = -0.51, p < 0.001, were negatively correlated with general
mental health problems while an external LOC showed a positive association, r =
0.35, p = 0.010. However, in a multiple regression model, R 2 = 53.9%, F (4, 47) 
= 13.73, p < 0.001, only SOC significantly predicted general mental health
problems by uniquely accounting for 13% of the variance. For PTSD symptoms, which
were highly correlated with general mental health problems, a similar pattern of 
results was found. Conclusion: SOC was found to be the most important correlate
of both general mental health problems and PTSD symptoms in an ICU and an
anesthesiology unit. Thus, if further evidenced by longitudinal studies,
implementing interventions focusing on an enhancement of SOC in training programs
for ICU and anesthesiology unit staff might be a promising approach to prevent or
reduce psychopathological symptoms.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00440 
PMCID: PMC6156425
PMID: 30283365 


256. Medicine (Baltimore). 2018 Sep;97(39):e11863. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000011863.

Prevalence and determinants of depression in caregivers of cancer patients: A
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Geng HM(1), Chuang DM(2), Yang F(1), Yang Y(1), Liu WM(1), Liu LH(3), Tian HM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology.
(2)Department of Glioma.
(3)Department of Nursing, Beijing Shijitan Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Aim of this study was to estimate the prevalence rate of depression
in cancer patient caregivers and to identify factors affecting depression and
quality of life of cancer caregivers.
METHODS: Relevant research articles were retrieved after literature search in
several electronic databases. Random effects meta-analyses were performed to
obtain pooled estimates of the prevalence rates of depression and anxiety; their 
respective scores, and quality of life scores. Significant relationships between 
depression and factors related to depression and quality of life reported in
individual studies were identified.
RESULTS: Thirty studies were included. Overall, 21,149 caregivers were appraised 
in these studies (age 52.65 years [95% CI: 49.65, 55.65]; 31.14% [28.40, 33.89]
men). The prevalence of depression and anxiety were 42.30% [33.31, 51.29] % and
46.55% [35.59, 57.52], respectively. Quality of life score, as measured with
Caregiver Quality of Life-Cancer scale was 64.55 [47.44, 81.66]. Patient's
condition, caregiving burden, duration of caregiving, spouse caregiver, caregiver
being unemployed, caregiver with chronic disease, caregiver's sleep quality,
caregiver's avoidance, financial problems, and female sex were positively
associated with depression whereas overall quality of life of caregiver, pre-loss
grief, caregiver's education level, caregiver's age, caregiver's sense of
coherence, and caregiver's bondage with patient were negatively associated with
depression in caregivers.
CONCLUSION: A considerably high prevalence of depression is found in cancer
patient caregivers. Several factors may affect depression and their quality of
life of cancer patient caregivers.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000011863 
PMCID: PMC6181540
PMID: 30278483  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Ophthalmol. 2018 Sep 9;2018:5604632. doi: 10.1155/2018/5604632. eCollection
2018.

Analysis of Morphologic and Functional Outcomes in Macular Edema due to Central
Retinal Vein Occlusion Treated with Intravitreal Dexamethasone Implant.

Niro A(1), Sborgia G(1), Sborgia A(1), Sborgia L(1), Furino C(1), Recchimurzo
N(1), Alessio G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Science, Neuroscience and Sense Organs, Eye Clinic,
University of Bari "A. Moro", Bari, Italy.

Purpose: To analyze anatomic and functional retinal changes and their correlation
after intravitreal dexamethasone implant (DEX implant) in patients with central
retinal vein occlusion- (CRVO-) related macular edema (ME) using optical
coherence tomography and microperimetry.
Methods: Fifteen treatment-naïve patients with functional impairment due to
CRVO-related ME were enrolled in this prospective interventional case series.
Main outcomes were best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), retinal sensitivity (RS),
and central retinal thickness (CRT). Secondary outcomes were ellipsoid zone (EZ) 
status and fixation behaviour. All patients underwent DEX implant and were
retreated according to predefined criteria. Data were prospectively recorded at
baseline and at month 1, 3, 6, 9, and 12. Correlation between main outcomes was
analyzed.
Results: Fifteen eyes of 15 patients (9 men, 6 women; mean age 61.8 ± 10.9 years)
were included. BCVA and CRT significantly improved at all follow-up visits, while
RS significantly improved at 3, 6, 9, and 12 months. EZ status and fixation
behaviour did not change significantly. Baseline CRT had a significant negative
correlation with BCVA and RS at different follow-up visits (r=-0.52  to -0.63, p 
≤ 0.04; r=-0.52, p=0.04; resp.). At all time points, there was not a significant 
correlation between CRT and BCVA and RS, while RS and BCVA showed a significant
correlation, increasing over time (r=-0.72  to -0.89; p < 0.001).
Conclusion: DEX implant led to a significant morphofunctional improvement.
Baseline CRT is predictive of changes of functional outcomes whose correlation
increases over time after treatment.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/5604632 
PMCID: PMC6151240
PMID: 30271628 


258. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2018 Dec;27(12):3636-3646. doi:
10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2018.08.037. Epub 2018 Sep 27.

A Meta-analytic Study of Predictors for Informal Caregiver Burden in Patients
With Stroke.

Zhu W(1), Jiang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)West China School of Nursing, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan Province,
China.
(2)West China School of Nursing, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan Province,
China. Electronic address: 496058235@qq.com.

BACKGROUND: Several studies have reported on predictors for caregiver burden in
patients with stroke, but the magnitude of the impact of these variables remains 
unclear. The aim of the study was to determine the magnitude of relationship
between each predictor and caregiver burden.
METHODS: Articles related to this filed were search in PUBMED, MEDLINE and
Cochrane Library electronic database from the upset to May 2018. Of the 812
articles identified, 22 were included in the final analysis (3025 patients and
2887 caregivers). Weighted correlation coefficient (r-index) was computed as
effect size for each predictor.
RESULTS: Of predictor variables of patients, the activity of daily living and
anxiety had moderate to large effect sizes; gender, neurological function and
depression had the small to moderate effect sizes. Of caregivers' predictors,
depression, anxiety, and sense of coherence had large effect sizes; gender,
daughter in law, physical health and employment status had small to moderate
effect sizes.
CONCLUSIONS: The most powerful predictors of caregiver burden using meta-analysis
were identified to direct future research and evidence-based practice.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2018.08.037 
PMID: 30268368  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2018 Nov - Dec;79:164-170. doi:
10.1016/j.archger.2018.08.010. Epub 2018 Aug 25.

Perceived stress and depression amongst older stroke patients: Sense of coherence
as a mediator?

Guo LN(1), Liu YJ(2), McCallum J(3), Söderhamn U(4), Ding XF(5), Yv SY(1), Zhu
YR(1), Guo YR(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, the first Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, PR China.
(2)Department of Nursing, The first Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, Henan, PR China. Electronic address: liu-yanjin@126.com.
(3)Department of Nursing & Community Health, Glasgow Caledonian University,
Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom.
(4)Faculty of Health and Sport Sciences, Department of Health and Nursing
Sciences, University of Agder, Grimstad, Aust-Agder, Norway. Electronic address: 
ulrika.soderhamn@uia.no.
(5)Department of Integrated ICU, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan Province, PR China.
(6)Department of Osteology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan Province, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to explore the relationship between perceived stress,
sense of coherence, and depression among older stroke patients.
METHODS: A demographic questionnaire, the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS), the Sense
of Coherence Scale (SOC) and the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression
Scale (CES-D) were distributed to 3000 older stroke patients from Neurology wards
in six large general hospitals, and 2907 individuals completed the survey. Data
analysis consisted of correlation, multiple linear regression, and structural
equation modeling.
RESULTS: The total score of the SOC and perceived stress showed a negative
correlation (r = -0.80, P ＜ 0.01), the total SOC of coherence and depression also
resulted in a negative correlation (r = -0.77, P ＜ 0.01), and the total score of 
the perceived stress and depression resulted in a positive correlation (r = 0.82,
P ＜ 0.01). The results of multiple regression analyses indicated that SOC
mediated the association between perceived stress and depression, and the
influence of perceived stress on depression was decreased by 16.0%with in the
sense of being out of control dimension and was decreased by 12.3% within the
feeling of tension dimension when sense of coherence was added to the model. The 
structural equation model confirmed that the sense of coherence had a partial
mediation effect between perceived stress and depression.
CONCLUSION: SOC is the mediating variable between perceived stress and
depression, and can reduce the influence of perceived stress on depression.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archger.2018.08.010 
PMID: 30265911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


260. BMC Health Serv Res. 2018 Sep 27;18(1):741. doi: 10.1186/s12913-018-3544-5.

Formative research in the development of a salutogenic early intervention home
visiting program integrated in public child health service in a multiethnic
population in Norway.

Leirbakk MJ(1)(2), Torper J(3), Engebretsen E(4), Opsahl JN(5), Zeanah P(6),
Magnus JH(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University of Oslo, Harald Schjelderups hus,
Forskningsveien 3a, 0373, Oslo, Norway. m.j.leirbakk@medisin.uio.no.
(2)Agency for Health, City of Oslo, Storgata 51, 0182, Oslo, Norway.
m.j.leirbakk@medisin.uio.no.
(3)Department for Primary Health and Social Services, City of Oslo, City Hall,
NO-0037, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Department of Health Sciences, University of Oslo, Harald Schjelderups hus,
Forskningsveien 3a, 0373, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Department of Health, City of Oslo, District Stovner, 0985, Oslo, Norway.
(6)College of Nursing and Allied Health Professions and Cecil J. Picard Center
for Child Development and Lifelong Learning, University of Louisiana at
Lafayette, 200 East Devalcourt Street, Lafayette, LA, 70506, USA.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Klaus Torgårds vei 3, Sogn Arena,
0372, Oslo, Norway.
(8)Department of Global Community Health & Behavioral Sciences, Tulane School of 
Public Health and Tropical Medicine, 1440 Canal Street, New Orleans, LA, 70112,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Few early intervention programs aimed at maternal and child health
have been developed to be integrated in the existing Child Health Service in a
country where the service is free, voluntary and used by the majority of the
eligible population. This study presents the process and the critical steps in
developing the "New Mothers" program.
METHODS: Formative research uses a mixed method, allowing us to obtain data from 
multiple sources. A scoping review provided information on early intervention
programs and studies, clarifying key elements when framing a new program. Key
informant and focus group interviews offered insight of existing challenges,
perceptions, identified power structures and offered reflections germane to the
identified framework, securing user involvement at all stages. Monthly meetings
with the project group enabled feedback loops for the data, securing program
advancement.
RESULTS: The "New Mothers" program was formed based on a salutogenic theory,
emphasizing resistance and strengths. Public health nurses in the existing Child 
Health Service were to offer universally all first-time mothers and children home
visits from gestational week 28 until the child reached 2 years, with
motivational interviewing and empathic communication as methods to mentor the
mothers, help them identify their strengths and resources, and provide support
and information.
CONCLUSIONS: Using formative research as mixed method ensures incorporation of
detailed information from multiple resources when an early intervention program
is developed. This method secured program appropriateness, both culturally and at
system level, when integrating new elements in the existing service.

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-018-3544-5 
PMCID: PMC6161435
PMID: 30261872  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Adolesc. 2018 Dec;69:72-79. doi: 10.1016/j.adolescence.2018.09.005. Epub 2018
Sep 24.

The parallel culture of bullying in Polish secondary schools: A grounded theory
study.

Wójcik M(1).

Author information: 
(1)SWPS University of Social Sciences and Humanities, Faculty in Katowice, ul.
Techników 9, 40-326, Katowice, Poland. Electronic address:
mgolonka-wojcik@swps.edu.pl.

INTRODUCTION: Bullying is a universal phenomenon observed in all schools
worldwide, with as many as 35% of students being involved in bullying. Group
context is crucial for understanding and preventing bullying, as peers are often 
present in bullying situations and have key roles in maintaining, preventing, or 
stopping it. The aims of this study were to investigate school bullying as a
social phenomenon in Poland and to understand how Polish adolescents perceive,
discuss, and make sense of bullying in their communities.
METHODS: I carried out fieldwork at three public secondary schools in a city in
southern Poland, and conducted in-depth semi-structured interviews with 26
students aged 16/17 (16 girls, 10 boys). I used the grounded theory approach to
analyze the data, as it offered an opportunity for deeper understanding of
adolescents' social context and culture, with intragroup interactions playing a
central role.
RESULTS & CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that a parallel culture of bullying at
the micro level is created at these schools, which includes norms; a multi-stage 
process of victim creation; and rituals confirming the victim's status, group
coherence, and other students' attitudes and roles in the bullying. In terms of
policy implications, the findings suggest that it could prove beneficial to plan 
anti-bullying programs with adolescents themselves, as they could clarify the
contexts, situations, or triggers that might lead to bullying.

Copyright © 2018 The Foundation for Professionals in Services for Adolescents.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.adolescence.2018.09.005 
PMID: 30261362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Nurs Res. 2019 Apr;27(2):e15. doi: 10.1097/jnr.0000000000000283.

Psychosocial Predictors of Adjustment to Disability Among Patients With Breast
Cancer: A Cross-Sectional Descriptive Study.

Zhang Q(1), Xiao S(2), Yan L, Sun L(1), Wang Y(3), Huang M(4).

Author information: 
(1)MMed, RN, Nurse, Department of Nursing, Tianjin Medical University Cancer
Institute & Hospital, China.
(2)MMed, RN, Nurse, Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, China.
(3)MMed, RN, Associate Chief Nurse and Head Nurse, Department of Plastic and
Reconstructive Surgery, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute & Hospital,
China.
(4)MMed, RN, Nurse, Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Tianjin
Medical University Cancer Institute & Hospital, China.

BACKGROUND: Acceptance of disability relates to the process of adaptation, which 
reflects how the values of a patient change over time to accept herself or
himself as an intrinsically worthy person. Acceptance of disability (AOD) plays
an important role in the adjustment of persons with physical disability to their 
environment. However, no studies on the level of AOD in patients with breast
cancer are available in the literature.
PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to explore the significant factors that
influence disability acceptance in Chinese women with breast cancer.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted on 292 patients with breast cancer
between January and April 2017. Participants were assessed using the Acceptance
of Disability Scale-Revised, Medical Coping Modes Questionnaire, Sense of
Coherence Scale, Social Relational Quality Scale, and general information
questionnaire. Multiple regression analysis was used to determine the factors
associated with the level of disability acceptance.
RESULTS: The mean score for AOD was 79.14 and ranged from 32 to 128. Multiple
regression analysis indicated that family intimacy, friendships, confrontation,
manageability, family commitment, marital status, surgery, and
acceptance-resignation significantly affected disability acceptance, explaining
49.1% of the total variance in disability acceptance.
CONCLUSIONS/IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: The participants had a moderate level of
disability acceptance. Disability acceptance is an important factor in the
psychosocial adaptation to cancer. Healthcare staff should pay special attention 
to low scores for this factor and explore the potential of psychological
interventions to effectively reduce the posttraumatic stress response, encourage 
the adoption of positive coping strategies, and hasten disability acceptance and 
return to society.

DOI: 10.1097/jnr.0000000000000283 
PMID: 30260818  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Biomed Opt Express. 2018 May 7;9(6):2526-2542. doi: 10.1364/BOE.9.002526.
eCollection 2018 Jun 1.

Three-dimensional tomographic microscopy technique with multi-frequency
combination with partially coherent illuminations.

Li J(1)(2)(3), Chen Q(1)(2)(4), Sun J(1)(2)(3), Zhang J(1)(2)(3), Ding
J(1)(2)(3), Zuo C(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Electronic and Optical Engineering, Nanjing University of Science
and Technology, No. 200 Xiaolingwei Street, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210094,
China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Spectral Imaging & Intelligent Sense, Nanjing
University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210094, China.
(3)Smart Computational Imaging Laboratory (SCILab), Nanjing University of Science
and Technology, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210094, China.
(4)chenqian@njust.edu.cn.

We demonstrate a three-dimensional (3D) optical diffraction tomographic technique
with multi-frequency combination (MFC-ODT) for the 3D quantitative phase imaging 
of unlabeled specimens. Three sets of through-focus intensity images are captured
under an annular aperture and two circular apertures with different coherence
parameters. The 3D phase optical transfer functions (POTF) corresponding to
different illumination apertures are combined to obtain a synthesized frequency
response, achieving high-quality, low-noise 3D reconstructions with imaging
resolution up to the incoherent diffraction limit. Besides, the expression of 3D 
POTF for arbitrary illumination pupils is derived and analyzed, and the 3D
imaging performance of annular illumination is explored. It is shown that the
phase-contrast washout effect in high-NA circular apertures can be effectively
addressed by introducing a complementary annular aperture, which strongly boosts 
the phase contrast and improves the imaging resolution. By incorporating high-NA 
illumination as well as high-NA detection, MFC-ODT can achieve a theoretical
transverse resolution up to 200 nm and an axial resolution of 645 nm. To test the
feasibility of the proposed MFC-ODT technique, the 3D refractive index
reconstruction results are based on a simulated 3D resolution target and
experimental investigations of micro polystyrene bead and unstained biological
samples are presented. Due to its capability for high-resolution 3D phase imaging
as well as the compatibility with a widely available commercial microscope, the
MFC-ODT is expected to find versatile applications in biological and biomedical
research.

DOI: 10.1364/BOE.9.002526 
PMCID: PMC6154200
PMID: 30258670 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts
of interest related to this article.


264. J Altern Complement Med. 2018 Sep/Oct;24(9-10):872-880. doi:
10.1089/acm.2018.0169.

An Integrative Approach to Prostate Cancer.

Abrams DI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Zuckerberg San Francisco General
Hospital and UCSF Center for Integrative Medicine, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA.

OBJECTIVES: The mostly indolent natural history and long overall survival
associated with a diagnosis of prostate cancer provides a unique opportunity for 
men to explore diet and lifestyle interventions to alter the trajectory of their 
disease. As many patients may be appropriate for postponing conventional therapy,
the effects of various integrative interventions can be investigated. In
addition, treatment of prostate cancer with surgery, radiation, or androgen
deprivation therapy, all may produce physical or psychological side effects that 
could be amenable to complementary therapies. This article serves to review
salient information in the published literature.
DESIGN: A review of published research was conducted.
RESULTS: A plant-based antioxidant-rich diet with an emphasis on cruciferous
vegetables, tomatoes, soy, pomegranate, and marine omega 3 fatty acids while
avoiding saturated fats, including dairy products is the best option.
Supplementation with vitamin D3, omega 3, and some nutraceutical-based
preparations may be advised. It is likely prudent to avoid vitamin E and selenium
supplements. Physical activity has been shown to have multiple benefits in men
diagnosed with all stages of prostate cancer from strengthening bones, improving 
body habitus, and enhancing overall wellbeing. Yoga, combining physical activity 
with a mind-body component, has been shown to have a salutogenic effect in both
prostate cancer patients and their caregivers. Traditional Chinese Medicine may
be particularly useful in managing side effects of conventional treatments,
especially the hot flashes associated with androgen deprivation therapy. Although
the long natural history, availability of a useful blood marker of disease
progression and prolonged survival are overall positive features, they also
combine to allow men to live for a long time with diagnosed cancer, fear of
progression, or recurrence and fixation on changes in their prostate-specific
antigen level. The resultant stress can be deleterious to general health as well 
as possibly the natural history of their disease. Mind-body interventions to
reduce stress, including mindfulness-based stress reduction and support groups
may be useful adjunctive therapies.
CONCLUSION: Men with prostate cancer may benefit from lifestyle and complementary
interventions integrated with their conventional care.

DOI: 10.1089/acm.2018.0169 
PMID: 30247964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Int Dent J. 2019 Apr;69(2):141-149. doi: 10.1111/idj.12439. Epub 2018 Sep 24.

Association between sense of coherence and untreated dental caries in
preschoolers: a cross-sectional study.

Neves ÉTB(1), Perazzo MF(2), Gomes MC(1), Ribeiro ILA(3), Paiva SM(2),
Granville-Garcia AF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate Program in Dentistry, State University of Paraiba (UEPB), Campina
Grande, Brazil.
(2)Postgraduate Program in Dentistry, Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG), 
Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(3)Postgraduate Program in Dentistry, Federal University of Paraiba (UFPB), João 
Pessoa, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to evaluate factors associated with
the clinical consequences of untreated dental caries in children attending public
and private preschools.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted with a complex, preschool-based
sample of 769 children, 5 years of age, from public and private preschools in the
city of Campina Grande, Brazil. Clinical examinations to diagnose the
consequences of untreated caries were performed using the criteria of the pufa
index (p - pulp exposure; u - ulceration caused by movement of tooth fragments; f
- fistula; a - abscess). The psychological factor evaluated was
parental/caregiver sense of coherence (SOC), which was determined using a
validated assessment tool. Sociodemographic characteristics and the use of dental
services were also considered. Two examiners were trained to examine the clinical
consequences of untreated dental caries. The kappa statistic demonstrated a high 
level of agreement for the conditions evaluated. Descriptive analysis was
performed, followed by the use of an inductive decision tree (J48 algorithm;
α = 5%).
RESULTS: The factors associated with the clinical consequences of untreated
dental caries were toothache [prevalence ratio (PR) = 12.34; 95% confidence
interval (95% CI): 7.87-19.35; P < 0.001], attending a public preschool
(PR = 2.38; 95% CI: 1.83-3.09; P < 0.001), parents/caregivers younger than
30 years of age (PR = 1.45; 95% CI: 1.26-1.68; P < 0.001), parents/caregivers
with more than two children (PR = 1.47; 95% CI: 1.28-1.69; P < 0.001) and
parents/caregivers with a weak SOC (PR = 1.13; 95% CI: 1.01-1.28; P = 0.043).
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of clinical consequences of untreated dental caries
was low in the present sample and was associated with sociodemographic factors
(type of preschool, caregiver's age and number of children in the family) as well
as psychological factors (SOC).

© 2018 FDI World Dental Federation.

DOI: 10.1111/idj.12439 
PMID: 30246860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Qual Life Res. 2019 Feb;28(2):451-460. doi: 10.1007/s11136-018-2009-y. Epub 2018 
Sep 22.

Illness perceptions, depression and anxiety in informal carers of persons with
depression: a cross-sectional survey.

Scerri J(1)(2)(3), Saliba T(4)(5), Saliba G(6), Scerri CA(7), Camilleri L(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Health, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Malta, 
Msida, Malta. josianne.scerri@um.edu.mt.
(2)Faculty of Health, Social Care and Education, Kingston University and St
George's University of London, London, UK. josianne.scerri@um.edu.mt.
(3)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Malta, Room 51, Msida, MSD, 2080,
Malta. josianne.scerri@um.edu.mt.
(4)Mount Carmel Hospital, Attard, Malta.
(5)Department of Mental Health, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Malta, 
Msida, Malta.
(6)Learning Institute for Health Care Professionals, Mosta, Malta.
(7)Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, University of Malta, Msida, Malta.
(8)Statistics & Operations Research, Faculty of Science, University of Malta,
Msida, Malta.

PURPOSE: To examine the illness perceptions of informal carers of persons with
depression, using the theoretical framework of Leventhal's Common-Sense Model
(CSM) and to determine whether these illness perceptions are predictors of
anxiety and depression, as measures of psychological well-being.
METHODS: A cross-sectional survey was conducted with 94 Maltese individuals
caring for a person with depression within a community setting. The informal
carers completed the modified Illness Perception Questionnaire (IPQS-Relatives
version) and the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS). Data were analysed
using descriptive statistics, Spearman's rank order correlations and ANCOVA
regression models, to identify predictors of anxiety and depression respectively 
in the informal carers.
RESULTS: The informal carers perceived depression as a cyclical condition, having
negative consequences on both the patient and on themselves. Participants
perceived the causes of depression to be mainly psychosocial in nature and
generally viewed the treatment as effective. Caring for a person with depression 
was perceived as having a considerable negative emotional impact on them. Years
of caring was identified as a predictor of anxiety accounting for 20.4% of the
variance, and timeline chronicity beliefs, consequences (relative) and illness
coherence were identified as predictors of depression, accounting for 56.8% of
the variance.
CONCLUSION: Illness cognitions are significant predictors of depression, thereby 
suggesting that cognition-based interventions may be effective in targeting
depression in these informal carers. Thus, health professionals should explore
the carers' personal understanding of the disease, their timeline beliefs and the
perceived consequences of providing care, as they relate to their psychological
well-being.

DOI: 10.1007/s11136-018-2009-y 
PMCID: PMC6373293
PMID: 30244359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2018 Nov - Dec;79:158-163. doi:
10.1016/j.archger.2018.09.002. Epub 2018 Sep 12.

Poor sleep quality and late-life depression among the elderly in urban
communities in liaoning, China: A moderated mediation analysis.

Liu Y(1), Li T(1), Zhang R(1), Guo L(2), Liu K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Affiliated Hospital of Jining Medical University, Jining, shandong, PR China.
(2)Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, PR China.
(3)College of Nursing, Jinzhou Medical University, Jinzhou, Liaoning, PR China.
Electronic address: 18841621466@163.com.

This study aims to investigate a moderated mediation model in the relationship
between poor sleep quality, depressive symptoms, perceived stress, sense of
coherence. A cross-sectional survey was conducted from May to July 2015 in
Liaoning Province, China. 1050 community residents aged ≥60 years were ultimately
chosen to participate. The Chinese version of the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index 
(CPSQI), the Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale(CES-D),the Chinese version 
Perceived Stress Scale(CPSS), and the Sense of Coherence Scale (SOC) were used to
estimate sleep quality, late-life depression, perceived stress, and sense of
coherence (SOC) respectively. Pearson's correlations and the PROCESS macro were
applied to analyze the data. The results showed that perceived stress partially
mediated the association between poor sleep quality and depression symptoms (35% 
proportion mediated). In addition, the effect of poor sleep quality and the
effect of perceived stress on late-life depression was moderated by SOC.The
current findings indicates that the impact of poor sleep quality on late-life
depression through perceived stress can be buffered when the elderly individuals 
have a high SOC. Interventions should therefore target individuals who are
classified as poor sleepers but only have a lower SOC score. However,
longitudinal studies should be conducted in future to substantiate these
findings. Importantly, this research provides a useful theoretical and
methodological approach for prevention of depression among the elderly in urban
China.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archger.2018.09.002 
PMID: 30241095  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Explore (NY). 2019 Jan - Feb;15(1):38-46. doi: 10.1016/j.explore.2018.08.001.
Epub 2018 Aug 20.

The Effect of Progressive Muscle Relaxation on Emotional Competence:
Depression-Anxiety-Stress, Sense of Coherence, Health-Related Quality of Life,
and Well-Being of Unemployed People in Greece: An Intervention Study.

Merakou K(1), Tsoukas K(2), Stavrinos G(2), Amanaki E(3), Daleziou A(3),
Kourmousi N(3), Stamatelopoulou G(3), Spourdalaki E(3), Barbouni A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public and Administrative Health, National School of Public
Health, 196, Alexandras Ave., Athens 11521, Greece. Electronic address:
kmerakou@esdy.edu.gr.
(2)Panhellenic Association for Psychosocial Rehabilitation and Work Integration, 
41, Ipirou, 10439 Athens, Greece.
(3)Department of Public and Administrative Health, National School of Public
Health, 196, Alexandras Ave., Athens 11521, Greece.

OBJECTIVES: Assessment of the impact of Jacobson Progressive Muscle Relaxation
(PMR) on depression-anxiety-stress symptoms, sense of coherence, health-related
quality of life and well-being in long-term unemployed people with anxiety
disorders.
DESIGN AND SETTING: An intervention study was conducted at a relevant
Organization, in Athens, Greece.
INTERVENTION: 50 long-term unemployed individuals suffering from anxiety
disorders participated in the study. Participants were separated into two groups:
(a) the intervention group (30 individuals) that was trained on an 8-week on
Progressive Muscle Relaxation program and also received counseling services and
(b) the control group (20 individuals) that received only counseling services.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Depression, Anxiety, Stress Scale, Sense of Coherence,
Health-Related Quality of Life and Well-being were evaluated at baseline and
after the intervention.
RESULTS: Significant changes were noted in the studied variables between the two 
groups, with improved outcomes in the intervention group. The intervention group 
showed a decrease in the symptoms of depression, anxiety, stress (p < 0.001)
[depression (p < 0.001), anxiety (p < 0.001), stress (p < 0.001)], a higher score
of sense of coherence (p < 0.001), improved health-related quality of life
regarding the mental health domain (p < 0.001), and improvement in well-being
(p < 0.001). No significant change was observed in the control group during the
follow-up period.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.explore.2018.08.001 
PMID: 30228090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Chronic Illn. 2020 Sep;16(3):226-236. doi: 10.1177/1742395318799843. Epub 2018
Sep 18.

Effect of a participatory patient education programme (NExt EDucation) in
group-based patient education among Danes with type 2 diabetes.

Christoffersen LA(1), Hansen AK(1), Pals RA(1), Willaing I(1), Siersma V(2),
Olesen K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen, Gentofte, Denmark.
(2)The Research Unit for General Practice and Section of General Practice,
Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the effect of a participatory group-based education
programme for individuals with type 2 diabetes, Next Education.
METHOD: In a quasi-experimental study, individuals with type 2 diabetes were
recruited from 14 Danish municipalities with a patient education programme. Eight
municipalities using Next Education were intervention sites; six control sites
used usual group-based education programmes. Data were collected through
questionnaires at baseline and at 3 and 12 months after programmes ended. Changes
in quality of life (EQ-5D-5L), diabetes-related emotional distress (PAID-5),
physical activity, diet, foot care and sense of coherence (SOC-13) were assessed 
in generalised linear mixed models.
RESULTS: At baseline, 310 participants (52.6% females, mean age 62.5 years
[SD = 10.7] and a mean duration of type 2 diabetes of 6.9 years [SD = 8.4])
participated in Next Education (n = 234) or group-based education (n = 76) at
control sites. Compared with participants at control sites, participants at
intervention sites had significantly larger sense of coherence scores at 3 (9.4%,
p = 0.03) and 12 (9.8%, p = 0.02) months of follow-up. Other measures did not
differ significantly between groups.
DISCUSSION: It is likely that person-centeredness and high degrees of user
participation at the intervention sites improved sense of coherence among Danes
with type 2 diabetes.

DOI: 10.1177/1742395318799843 
PMID: 30227718  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Perspect Psychol Sci. 2018 Nov;13(6):734-749. doi: 10.1177/1745691618771981. Epub
2018 Sep 18.

Finding Meaning With Creativity in the Past, Present, and Future.

Kaufman JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neag School of Education, University of Connecticut.

Being creative is considered a desirable trait, yet most empirical studies
emphasize how to increase creativity rather than explore its possible benefits. A
natural connection is how creativity can enhance life's meaning. Many of the core
concepts in work on the meaning of life, such as the needs for coherence,
significance, and purpose or the desire for symbolic immortality, can be reached 
through creative activity. The synthesis of these two constructs-creativity and
the meaning of life-is discussed with a temporal model encompassing past,
present, and future pathways to creativity. The past pathway can help one
understand and reflect on life. The present pathway can remind one of life's joy 
and the many possible connections with humanity. Finally, the future pathway
strives to ensure some type of legacy that may resonate with younger generations.

DOI: 10.1177/1745691618771981 
PMID: 30227083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Pers Soc Psychol Bull. 2019 May;45(5):688-699. doi: 10.1177/0146167218795133.
Epub 2018 Sep 18.

Routines and Meaning in Life.

Heintzelman SJ(1), King LA(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Rutgers University-Newark, NJ, USA.
(2)2 University of Missouri, Columbia, USA.

Previous research links the experience of meaning in life (MIL) with
environmental structure and the coherence of external stimuli. The current
studies directly test the association between one source of structure in everyday
life-routines-and MIL. First, Study 1 ( N = 317) found a positive relationship
between trait preference for routine and MIL. Study 2 expanded upon this
cross-sectional finding with experience sampling data ( N = 85; 2,590 episodes)
showing that the degree to which current, naturally occurring, behavior followed 
a typical routine positively related to participants' momentary feelings of MIL. 
These findings have implications for conceptualizations of MIL, suggesting a
previously unnoted, mundane, and ubiquitous source of MIL. The potential roles of
boredom and novelty and individual and situational differences for these effects 
are discussed.

DOI: 10.1177/0146167218795133 
PMID: 30226411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Psychogeriatrics. 2019 Jan;19(1):55-64. doi: 10.1111/psyg.12367. Epub 2018 Sep
16.

Randomized controlled study on the effectiveness of animal-assisted therapy on
depression, anxiety, and illness perception in institutionalized elderly.

Ambrosi C(1), Zaiontz C(1), Peragine G(2), Sarchi S(2), Bona F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Psychology Unit, IES Abroad c/o Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Milan,
Italy.
(2)Fondazione Santa Chiara Long-Term Geriatric Care, Centro Multiservizi per la
Popolazione Anziana, Lodi, Italy.

AIM: The aim of this study was to verify dog-assisted therapy's effectiveness on 
depression and anxiety in institutionalized elderly. Patients' illness perception
was examined to identify core beliefs regarding mood, personal control, and
illness coherence because they can affect treatment compliance. Subjective
perception of pain, social interaction, and setting-bound observable variables
were also studied.
METHODS: This study involved a randomized sample of institutionalized patients 65
years of age and older; the treatment group had 17 subjects and the control group
had 14 subjects. All patients were administered the Mini-Mental State
Examination, 15-item Geriatric Depression Scale, Positive and Negative Affect
Schedule, Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7, Illness Perception Questionnaire, and
Numeric Pain Rating Scale. Intra- and inter-group data analysis was performed
before and after treatment. Over the course of 10 weeks, patients participated in
individual 30-min sessions. An observational methodology was developed to record 
verbal and non-verbal interactions between the elderly, the dog, and the dog
handler.
RESULTS: A large effect size and a statistically significant decrease in 15-item 
Geriatric Depression Scale scores were identified in the treatment group. No
significant differences were detected in the Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7,
Positive and Negative Affect Schedule, and Numeric Pain Rating Scale. However,
the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule and the Numeric Pain Rating Scale
showed a moderate decrease. The Illness Perception Questionnaire's timeline
(acute/chronic) and treatment control subscales showed a clinically relevant,
large effect size.
CONCLUSIONS: Dog-assisted therapy has proved to be effective in reducing symptoms
of depression in institutionalized elderly. The increase in verbal interactions
with the handlers throughout the study suggests the dog acts as a facilitator of 
social interaction, eliciting positive emotional responses. Dog-assisted therapy 
shows promising results in the perception of illness timeline and treatment
control, indicating potential enhancement of the sense of treatment-related
empowerment. However, further study is required.

© 2018 Japanese Psychogeriatric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/psyg.12367 
PMID: 30221438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Nonlinear Sci. 2018;28(5):1915-1957. doi: 10.1007/s00332-018-9471-0. Epub 2018 
Jun 1.

From Large Deviations to Semidistances of Transport and Mixing: Coherence
Analysis for Finite Lagrangian Data.

Koltai P(1), Renger DRM(2).

Author information: 
(1)1Institute of Mathematics, Freie Universität Berlin, Arnimallee 6, 14195
Berlin, Germany.
(2)2Weierstraß-Institut, Mohrenstraße 39, 10117 Berlin, Germany.

One way to analyze complicated non-autonomous flows is through trying to
understand their transport behavior. In a quantitative, set-oriented approach to 
transport and mixing, finite time coherent sets play an important role. These are
time-parametrized families of sets with unlikely transport to and from their
surroundings under small or vanishing random perturbations of the dynamics. Here 
we propose, as a measure of transport and mixing for purely advective (i.e.,
deterministic) flows, (semi)distances that arise under vanishing perturbations in
the sense of large deviations. Analogously, for given finite Lagrangian
trajectory data we derive a discrete-time-and-space semidistance that comes from 
the "best" approximation of the randomly perturbed process conditioned on this
limited information of the deterministic flow. It can be computed as shortest
path in a graph with time-dependent weights. Furthermore, we argue that coherent 
sets are regions of maximal farness in terms of transport and mixing, and hence
they occur as extremal regions on a spanning structure of the state space under
this semidistance-in fact, under any distance measure arising from the physical
notion of transport. Based on this notion, we develop a tool to analyze the state
space (or the finite trajectory data at hand) and identify coherent regions. We
validate our approach on idealized prototypical examples and well-studied
standard cases.

DOI: 10.1007/s00332-018-9471-0 
PMCID: PMC6132839
PMID: 30220792 


274. HERD. 2019 Jan;12(1):69-86. doi: 10.1177/1937586718796651. Epub 2018 Sep 11.

Conceptualizing Health Promotion in Relation to Outpatient Healthcare Building
Design: A Scoping Review.

Miedema E(1), Lindahl G(1), Elf M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Building Design, Department of Architecture and Civil
Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)2 School of Education, Health and Social Studies, Dalarna University, Falun,
Sweden.

OBJECTIVE:: This review explored different conceptualizations of health promotion
in the context of, and in relation to, outpatient building design.
BACKGROUND:: Today's healthcare organizations are implementing holistic
healthcare approaches such as health promotion, while simultaneously increasing
their outpatient services. These health promotion approaches, focused on
empowering people to take control of their health, are expected to have
implications for the outpatient healthcare building design. Yet there is limited 
knowledge what these may be. A review of the literature on the current state of
the art is thus needed to enable and support dialog on future healthcare building
design.
METHOD:: A scoping review of 4,506 papers, collected from four databases and
three scientific journals in 2015, resulted in 14 papers relating health
promotion to building design and outpatient healthcare. From the subsequent
content analysis, multiple common themes and subthemes emerged.
RESULTS:: The review reveals diverse range of health promotion interpretations,
three health promotion perspectives (health behavior, health equity, and sense of
coherence), associated design approaches, design objectives, health-related
outcomes, building features, and solutions.
CONCLUSIONS:: While diverse health promotion perspectives might merely represent 
variations in focus, these differences become problematic when relating to
building design. To support further dialogs on development of health promotion
in, and in relation to, the build environment, there is a need to strengthen the 
health promotion vocabulary. Further research is needed to compare different
design approaches and how these can be combined to minimize contradicting
implications for building design.

DOI: 10.1177/1937586718796651 
PMID: 30203663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Sex Reprod Healthc. 2018 Oct;17:97-102. doi: 10.1016/j.srhc.2018.06.002. Epub
2018 Jun 18.

Living with painful endometriosis - A struggle for coherence. A qualitative
study.

Hållstam A(1), Stålnacke BM(2), Svensén C(3), Löfgren M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Science and Education, Södersjukhuset, Karolinska
Institutet, and Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Unit, Södersjukhuset, SE-118 83
Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address: andrea.hallstam@ki.se.
(2)Department of Community Medicine and Rehabilitation, Rehabilitation Medicine, 
Umeå University, SE- 901 85 Umeå, Sweden; Department of Clinical Sciences,
Karolinska Institutet, and Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Danderyd
Hospital, SE-182 88 Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address:
britt-marie.stalnacke@umu.se.
(3)Department of Clinical Science and Education, Södersjukhuset, Karolinska
Institutet, and Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Unit, Södersjukhuset, SE-118 83
Stockholm, Sweden; University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, UTMB Health, 
Department of Anesthesiology, Galveston, TX, USA. Electronic address:
christer.svensen@ki.se.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences, Karolinska Institutet, and Department of
Rehabilitation Medicine, Danderyd Hospital, SE-182 88 Stockholm, Sweden.
Electronic address: monika.lofgren@ki.se.

OBJECTIVES: The study sought to examine women's experience of painful
endometriosis including long-term aspects, social consequences, impact of
treatment and development of own coping strategies.
STUDY DESIGN: This qualitative study was based on 16 individual interviews
analyzed according to grounded theory. The thirteen women (age 24-48) were
recruited at a pain clinic in Stockholm, Sweden.
RESULTS: A theory illustrating women's experience of living with painful
endometriosis was developed with three categories and one core category.
Bidirectional interactions between the categories and with the core category were
found. Endometriosis influenced the women's sensations, feelings and reactions,
creating a sense of difference from other women (category: Woman with painful
endometriosis). The condition led to either helpful or harmful encounters with
health care and significant others (category: Dependence). It also had overall
physical, social and existential consequences (category: A ruined life). To cope,
the women had to struggle for coherence by searching for understanding, coping
and meaning (core category: Living with painful endometriosis).
CONCLUSIONS: Living with severe painful endometriosis signified a struggle for
coherence. The women needed to deal with feelings of difference, dependence and a
ruined life and thus struggled for understanding, coping and meaning. Health-care
providers should promote the struggle for coherence by explaining the feeling of 
difference, minimizing dependence and supporting the process of disease-related
grief.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier India Pvt Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.srhc.2018.06.002 
PMID: 30193728  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Sex Reprod Healthc. 2018 Oct;17:56-64. doi: 10.1016/j.srhc.2018.07.001. Epub 2018
Jul 6.

Quality of couple relationship among first-time mothers and partners, during
pregnancy and the first six months of parenthood.

Bäckström C(1), Kåreholt I(2), Thorstensson S(3), Golsäter M(4), Mårtensson
LB(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Skövde, School of Health and Education, P.O. Box 408, SE-541 28 
Skövde, Sweden; Skaraborg Hospital Skövde, 'Woman, Child' (K3), SE-541 85 Skövde,
Sweden; Jönköping University, School of Health and Welfare, CHILD-research Group,
Box 1026, SE-551 11 Jönköping, Sweden. Electronic address:
caroline.backstrom@his.se.
(2)Jönköping University, School of Health and Welfare, Aging Research Network -
Jönköping (ARN-J), Box 1026, SE-551 11 Jönköping, Sweden; Karolinska Institutet
and Stockholm University, Aging Research Center, Gävlegatan 16, SE-113 30
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)University of Skövde, School of Health and Education, P.O. Box 408, SE-541 28 
Skövde, Sweden.
(4)Jönköping University, School of Health and Welfare, CHILD-research Group, Box 
1026, SE-551 11 Jönköping, Sweden.

DOI: 10.1016/j.srhc.2018.07.001 
PMID: 30193721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Front Psychiatry. 2018 Aug 21;9:378. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00378. eCollection
2018.

Sense of Coherence and Stress-Related Resilience: Investigating the Mediating and
Moderating Mechanisms in the Development of Resilience Following Stress or
Adversity.

Mc Gee SL(1)(2), Höltge J(1)(2), Maercker A(1)(2), Thoma MV(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Psychopathology and Clinical Intervention, Institute of Psychology, University
of Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)University Research Priority Program 'Dynamics of Healthy Aging', University
of Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Background: Trauma, stress, and adversity are well-known for having lasting
negative effects on health. Yet, not all individuals go on to develop
psychopathology or impaired health. However, little is known about the underlying
mechanisms which influence the development of stress-related resilience. Sense of
coherence-revised (SOC-R) may play a role in this process, as it is formed
through overcoming stress or adversity. It may also influence the steeling
effect, which suggests that previous exposure to moderate adversity increases
resilience to later adversities. Objectives: This study aimed to examine the
mediating and moderating roles of SOC-R in the relationship between stress or
adversity, and psychological health and well-being. It further aimed to
investigate the role of SOC-R in steeling processes. Methods: The study used a
longitudinal design, with data collection at baseline and one-year follow-up.
Participants included (N = 238) Swiss older adults (Mage = 68.3 years).
Standardized questionnaires assessed early-life adversity, recent chronic stress,
SOC-R, and current health and well-being. Mediation and moderation analyses
examined the mechanisms underpinning stress-related resilience and curvilinear
associations assessed steeling. Results: Results showed that the Manageability
subscale of SOC-R significantly moderated the relationship between chronic stress
and general mental health (b = 0.04, 95% CI [0.007, 0.082], t = 2.32, p < 0.05). 
Furthermore, SOC-R significantly mediated the relationship for general mental
health (GMH) and satisfaction with life (SWL) with childhood emotional neglect
(GMH: b = -0.056, 95% BCa CI [-0.126, -0.002]; SWL: b = -0.043, 95% BCa CI
[-0.088, -0.004]), childhood physical neglect (GMH: b = -0.100, 95% BCa CI
[-0.232, -0.002]; SWL: b = -0.081, 95% BCa CI [-0.181, -0.002]), and chronic
stress (GMH: b = -0.052, 95% BCa CI [-0.100, -0.001]; SWL: b = -0.055, 95% BCa CI
[-0.097, -0.020]). No curvilinear associations were observed between stress or
adversity and SOC-R. Conclusions: This study expands on the limited research on
stress-related resilience by examining the role of SOC-R in the interactions
between adversity, stress, and health. Future research should examine SOC-R in
samples with a greater range and different types of adversity. Overall, findings 
suggest that SOC-R is an important mechanism underpinning the development of
stress-related resilience.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00378 
PMCID: PMC6110848
PMID: 30186189 


278. Tumori. 2019 Aug;105(4):288-295. doi: 10.1177/0300891618792458. Epub 2018 Sep 5.

Sociodemographic, clinical, and psychological characteristics identify groups of 
Italian cancer patients with high rates of unmet needs.

Bonacchi A(1)(2), Fazzini E(2), Messina S(2), Muraca MG(3), Pacetti P(4), Di
Miceli S(5), Miccinesi G(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Clinical and Descriptive Epidemiology Unit, Institute for Cancer Research
and Prevention-ISPO, Florence, Italy.
(2)2 Centro Studi e Ricerca Synthesis, Florence, Italy.
(3)3 Centro Riabilitazione Oncologica, Institute for Cancer Research and
Prevention-ISPO, Florence, Italy.
(4)4 Azienda USL Nordovest, Oncologia Ambito Territoriale di Massa Carrara,
Carrara, Italy.
(5)5 Rete di Cure Palliative, Zona Nord Ovest, USL Centro Firenze, Florence,
Italy.

PURPOSE: Although an optimal goal remains the routine assessment of unmet needs
of all patients with cancer, particular attention should be paid to those groups 
of patients with characteristics known to be more frequently associated with
unmet needs in general or with specific areas of need. This report aims to
describe the sociodemographic, clinical, and psychological characteristics
associated with higher unmet needs in Italian cancer patients.
METHODS: A total of 835 cancer patients from different care settings (ward, day
hospital, follow-up ambulatory, rehabilitation unit, and palliative care) filled 
out the Needs Evaluation Questionnaire (NEQ), the Psychological Distress
Inventory, and the Sense of Coherence Scale. Association of NEQ scores with the
clinical and demographic variables were tested using analysis of variance.
RESULTS: Higher NEQ total score was associated with lower educational level,
inpatient care setting, radiotherapy treatment, psychological distress, and lower
resilience trait sense of coherence. Different predictors were identified for
different areas of unmet needs. Care setting, psychological distress, and
resilience trait were the strongest indicators of unmet needs in every area:
information/communication, assistance/care, material needs, relational needs, and
psychoemotional support.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinicians should consider that inpatients with a high distress and 
a low resilience trait sense of coherence represent a group of cancer patients to
be investigated with particular attention regarding unmet needs.

DOI: 10.1177/0300891618792458 
PMID: 30185126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Brain Inj. 2018;32(13-14):1612-1622. doi: 10.1080/02699052.2018.1511066. Epub
2018 Sep 5.

Spirituality and its relationship with positive adjustment following traumatic
brain injury: a scoping review.

Jones KF(1), Pryor J(2)(3), Care-Unger C(1), Simpson GK(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)a Social Work Department , Royal Rehab , Sydney , New South Wales , Australia.
(2)b Nursing and Midwifery , University of Sydney , Sydney, NSW , Australia.
(3)e Nursing Research , Royal Rehab , Sydney , NSW, Australia.
(4)c Brain Injury Rehabilitation Research Group , Ingham Institute of Applied
Medical Research , Sydney , NSW , Australia.
(5)d John Walsh Centre for Rehabilitation Research , Kolling Institue, University
of Sydney , Sydney , NSW, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the extent of research which has investigated spirituality
or closely related meaning-making constructs after traumatic brain injury (TBI).
DESIGN: A scoping review was employed to capture the broadest possible range of
studies.
METHODS: Search terms 'spirituality', 'religion', 'beliefs', 'faith', 'hope',
'meaning', 'purpose in life', 'sense of coherence' and 'posttraumatic growth'
were combined with search terms related to TBI. Findings were restricted to
empirical studies published in English, in peer-reviewed journals and conducted
over a 20-year period between 1997 and 2016.
RESULTS: Nine studies were identified, conducted in the USA, Canada and the UK.
These included eight quantitative studies and one qualitative study. Definitions 
and measurement of spirituality varied widely among the studies. Findings
revealed that spirituality was closely related to a number of positive outcomes
following TBI including psychological coping, physical health, mental health,
productivity, life satisfaction, functional independence and posttraumatic
growth.
CONCLUSIONS: The limited research conducted into spirituality following TBI
suggests it can play an important role in the recovery process. Further research 
is necessary to identify the particular spiritual needs of this population, and
how clinical staff may be supported to address such needs.

DOI: 10.1080/02699052.2018.1511066 
PMID: 30182741  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Bundesgesundheitsblatt Gesundheitsforschung Gesundheitsschutz. 2018
Oct;61(10):1215-1224. doi: 10.1007/s00103-018-2804-1.

[Local public health reporting as a basis for planning health promotion for
children].

[Article in German]

Böhm A(1), Sadowski U(2).

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Gesundheit, Ministerium für Arbeit, Soziales, Gesundheit, Frauen und
Familie (MASGF), Henning-von-Tresckow-Str. 2-13, 14467, Potsdam, Deutschland.
andreas.boehm@masgf.brandenburg.de.
(2)Koordinierungsstelle, Gesundheitliche Chancengleichheit Brandenburg,
Gesundheit Berlin Brandenburg e. V., Behlertsr.3a, Potsdam, 14467, Deutschland.

The Health Report (Gesundheitsberichterstattung, GBE) describes the health of the
overall population and also highlights areas or topics where specific action may 
be required. Additionally, in line with a new definition, the GBE provides an
objective basis for participative processes, thereby building a bridge to health 
promotion concepts.Municipal integrated health strategies (municipal prevention
chains) are based on the salutogenesis concept. One particularly important
characteristic of prevention chains is, among others, their participative
approach to develop need-based measures on a municipal level. This implies an
overarching way of working and a coordinated approach between several
stakeholders. Moreover, it requires a combination of health, social, and
environmental data, as well as integrated GBE, which serves as a planning
basis.In the federal state of Brandenburg, two test regions were chosen, and
a municipal prevention chain was followed and monitored by the Health Equity
Coordination Office (Koordinierungsstelle Gesundheitliche Chancengleichheit)
during the implementation period. In the context of an evaluation, barriers and
success factors were identified. During the implementation period four additional
phases were identified and specific aspects were also assigned to these phases.
Moreover, social environmental oriented data should be reliable, continuously
collected, and allow for a local comparability. Data combined from different
providers, supplemented with subjective data, could fill the gap and support
participative processes.How a good integration in municipal planning processes
can be successful, as well as correlated questions about necessary resources,
will need to be investigated in future processes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00103-018-2804-1 
PMID: 30182139  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Affect Disord. 2019 Jan 1;242:14-21. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2018.08.002. Epub 2018 
Aug 9.

Sense of coherence, burden and mental health in caregiving: A systematic review
and meta-analysis.

Del-Pino-Casado R(1), Espinosa-Medina A(2), López-Martínez C(2), Orgeta V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing. University of Jaén, Spain. Electronic address:
rdelpino@ujaen.es.
(2)Department of Nursing. University of Jaén, Spain.
(3)Division of Psychiatry, University College London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Informal caregiving is associated with a number of negative effects
on carers' physical and psychological well-being. The salutogenic theory argues
that sense of coherence (SOC) is an important factor in psychological adjustment 
to stress. The main aim of this study was to systematically review current
evidence on the association between SOC, burden and mental health outcomes in
informal carers.
METHOD: A systematic search was carried out up to September 2017 in the following
databases: PubMed, CINAHL (EBSCO), PsychInfo (OVID) and Scopus. Studies were
included if they evaluated the relationship between sense of coherence and
subjective caregiver burden and/or mental health outcomes, specifically symptoms 
of depression and anxiety. Meta-analyses were performed and subgroup analyses
were carried out to explore if methodological factors influenced findings.
RESULTS: Thirty-five studies were included in the meta-analysis, which provided
40 independent samples with 22 independent comparisons for subjective caregiver
burden, 26 for symptoms of depression and 7 for symptoms of anxiety. Higher
levels of SOC were associated with lower levels of subjective caregiver burden
and better mental health outcomes. Publication bias did not change the estimate
of the effect.
LIMITATIONS: Most of the studies included in this review were cross-sectional.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings suggest that SOC is an important determinant of carer
well-being and may protect carers from high levels of psychological distress and 
caregiver burden.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2018.08.002 
PMID: 30170234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


282. PLoS One. 2018 Aug 30;13(8):e0202204. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0202204.
eCollection 2018.

Suggestion of self-(in)coherence modulates cognitive dissonance.

Hagège J(1)(2), Chammat M(1)(2), Tandetnik C(1)(2), Naccache L(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)dINSERM, U 1127, Paris, France.
(2)Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, ICM, PICNIC Lab, Paris, France.
(3)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Faculté de Médecine
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(4)AP-HP, Groupe hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Department of Neurology, Paris,
France.
(5)AP-HP, Groupe hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Department of Neurophysiology,
Paris, France.

While cognitive dissonance is an influential concept of social psychology, its
relations with consciousness and episodic memory remain strongly debated. We
recently used the free-choice paradigm (FCP) to demonstrate the crucial role of
conscious memory of previous choices on choice-induced preference change (CIPC). 
After choosing between two similarly rated items, subjects reevaluated chosen
items as more attractive, and rejected items as less attractive. However such a
CIPC was present exclusively for items that were correctly remembered as chosen
or rejected during the choice stage, both in healthy controls and in amnesic
patients. In the present work, we show that CIPC can be modulated by suggestive
quotes promoting self-coherence or self-incoherence. In addition to the crucial
role of memory of previous choices, we discovered that memory of the suggestive
quotes was correlated to the modulation of CIPC. Taken together these results
suggest that CIPC reflects a dynamic homeostatic regulation of self-coherence.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0202204 
PMCID: PMC6116930
PMID: 30161218  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


283. Compr Psychiatry. 2018 Oct;86:131-136. doi: 10.1016/j.comppsych.2018.08.006. Epub
2018 Aug 14.

Low sense of coherence is associated with anxiety among adults: Results based on 
data from all 47 prefectures of Japan.

Uchida H(1), Tsujino D(2), Muguruma T(2), Hino N(2), Sasaki K(2), Miyoshi M(2),
Koyama Y(2), Hirao K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation, Kurashiki Heisei Hospital, Kurashiki, Japan.
(2)Department of Occupational Therapy, Kibi International University, Takahashi, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Occupational Therapy, Kibi International University, Takahashi, 
Japan. Electronic address: hirao-k@kiui.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Anxiety disorder is a major societal, economic, and healthcare
burden, so it is essential to identify underlying risk factors. Sense of
coherence (SOC), defined as an individual's perceived ability to control events
and cope with challenges, is strongly associated with healthcare outcomes.
METHODS: This study investigated the association between SOC and anxiety among
adults in all 47 prefectures of Japan using a cross-sectional online panel
survey. SOC was assessed using the University of Tokyo Health Sociology version
of the SOC Scale and anxiety was assessed using the Generalized Anxiety
Disorder-7 (GAD-7) scale.
RESULTS: Among 2100 participants (1051 males and 1049 females), 475 (22.6%) were 
identified with anxiety (scoring 8 points or higher on the GAD-7 scale). Before
adjustment for potential confounders, there was a significant negative
association between SOC and presence of anxiety. Even after adjustment, the
presence of anxiety was significantly higher among the lower SOC subgroup than
the higher SOC subgroup.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that approximately one-fifth of adults in
Japan suffer from anxiety and that low SOC is a significant risk factor.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.comppsych.2018.08.006 
PMID: 30125814  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Clin Med Res. 2018 Sep;10(9):715-721. doi: 10.14740/jocmr3512w. Epub 2018 Jul
31.

Relationship Between Depression and Stress Coping Ability Among Residents in
Japan: A Two-Year Longitudinal Study.

Ito M(1)(2), Seo E(3)(4), Maeno T(3), Ogawa R(4), Maeno T(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Wakaba Home Care Clinic, Tsuchiura, Ibaraki, Japan.
(2)Department of General Medicine and Primary Care, University of Tsukuba
Hospital, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(3)Department of Primary Care and Medical Education, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(4)Center for Medical Education and Training, University of Tsukuba Hospital,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Background: Depression among medical residents is a critical issue. The early
detection of depression and provision of appropriate care is necessary for
fostering healthy conditions during clinical training. To investigate whether
Sense of Coherence (SOC), an indicator of stress coping ability, could be a
predictor of depression 2 years after the start of clinical training, we
conducted a national longitudinal study.
Methods: We distributed self-administered questionnaires to residents in 251
postgraduate educational hospitals just before the start of their clinical
training. The questionnaire contained the Center for Epidemiologic Studies
Depression (CES-D) scale (a screening tool for depression), the SOC scale, and
demographic factors. After 2 years, we distributed questionnaires to residents
who responded to the first survey. The second questionnaire contained the CES-D
scale and questions about working conditions. We categorized respondents into
three groups according to their SOC score and analyzed the relationship between
SOC groups (low, middle, high) and depressive symptoms on the follow-up survey.
Results: In total, 1,738 of 2,935 residents (59.2%) responded to the first
survey. Of these, 1,169 residents (67.3%) also responded to the follow-up survey.
A total of 169 residents were excluded because they screened positive for
depressive symptoms at the time of the first survey. On the follow-up survey, 187
residents (19.5%) had new-onset depressive symptoms: 33.3% in the low SOC group, 
18.2% in the middle SOC group, and 11.4% in the high SOC group (P < 0.01).
Compared with the high SOC group, the odds ratio for new-onset depressive
symptoms in the low SOC group was 2.04 (95% confidence interval, 1.02 - 4.05)
after adjusting for demographic factors, baseline CES-D score, and mean working
time.
Conclusions: SOC score is significantly associated with future depressive
symptoms among residents after 2 years. Residents in the low SOC group had a
2-fold higher risk of future depressive symptoms than those in the high SOC
group. The SOC scale might be a useful predictor of future depression and allow
for the provision of appropriate support to residents during clinical training.

DOI: 10.14740/jocmr3512w 
PMCID: PMC6089576
PMID: 30116442 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interest.


285. Scand J Caring Sci. 2019 Mar;33(1):102-110. doi: 10.1111/scs.12606. Epub 2018 Aug
16.

Being in control and striving for normalisation: A Norwegian pilot study on
parents' perceptions of hospital-at-home.

Aasen L(1), Ponton IG(2), Johannessen AM(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing and Health Promotion, OsloMet - Oslo Metropolitan
University, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Youth and Adolescent Care, Akershus University Hospital,
Lørenskog, Norway.
(3)Health Services Research Unit, Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog,
Norway.

In recent decades, there has been a shift from hospitalisation to home care
throughout the Western world, even for children. Hospital-at-home for children is
in a developmental phase and represents a new service model in Norway. The aim of
this pilot study conducted in a Norwegian healthcare setting was to explore how
parents with a sick child experienced early hospital discharge and further care
at home. The qualitative data are drawn from nine interviews with parents with a 
child admitted to hospital-at-home. Transcripts of interviews were analysed using
a method of qualitative content analysis. In the analysis, Antonovsky's
salutogenic perspective on how people cope in demanding life situations was
applied. The results show that the parents experienced hospital-at-home as
providing a calmer, more predictable family life compared to hospitalisation.
They argued that good information and training in medical procedures prior to
hospital discharge made hospital-at-home easier to master. The participants
pointed out the importance of the professionals' competence and their ability to 
interact with the child and the parent. The certitude that they could return to
the hospital at any time made them feel safe and in control. The parents
associated hospital-at-home with a kind of normalisation of their family life.
They had a prominent need for normalisation, and this was probably a motivation
for agreeing to the hospital-at-home arrangement. The findings indicate that
hospital-at-home for children is a good solution if the parents are well prepared
and feel in control. In addition, certain structural conditions must be in place 
before this type of health care is established; there must be a certain volume of
patients and the distance to the hospital must be clearly limited. Norwegian
policymakers should initiate more pilot testing of hospital-at-home for children.
Users and clinicians should be involved in establishing and evaluating these
services.

© 2018 Nordic College of Caring Science.

DOI: 10.1111/scs.12606 
PMID: 30112773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


286. BMC Public Health. 2018 Aug 15;18(1):1012. doi: 10.1186/s12889-018-5955-y.

Examining the relationship between sports participation and youth developmental
outcomes for socially vulnerable youth.

Super S(1), Hermens N(2)(3), Verkooijen K(2), Koelen M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chair Group Health and Society, Department of Social Sciences, Wageningen
University, P.O. Box 8130, 6700, EW, Wageningen, the Netherlands.
sabina.super@wur.nl.
(2)Chair Group Health and Society, Department of Social Sciences, Wageningen
University, P.O. Box 8130, 6700, EW, Wageningen, the Netherlands.
(3)School of Governance, Utrecht University, Bijlhouwerstraat 6, 3511, ZC,
Utrecht, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Research has shown that sports participation is positively related to
youth developmental outcomes, but it is still unknown if sports participation
relates to these outcomes among socially vulnerable youth. Hence, this research
aimed to examine the relationship between sports participation and youth
developmental outcomes (i.e., problem behaviour, pro-social behaviour, school
performance, subjective health, well-being, self-regulation skills, and sense of 
coherence) for socially vulnerable youth. In addition, the stability of the
relationship between sports participation and the youth developmental outcomes
were investigated with a six-month interval.
METHODS: Two identical questionnaires were administered with a six-month interval
by youth professionals from four youth organisations, measuring the youth
developmental outcomes and sports participation rates of socially vulnerable
youth. In total, 283 socially vulnerable youths (average 14.68 years old)
participated at baseline and 187 youths after six months.
RESULTS: The results showed that sports participation was positively related to
pro-social behaviour, subjective health, well-being, and sense of coherence at
both measurements. We found no evidence for the relationship between sports
participation and problem behaviour and the self-regulatory skills. In addition, 
sports participation was only positively related to school performance at the
first, but not at the second, measurement.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study show that there are positive relationships
between sports participation and several youth developmental outcomes. Based on
the current data no conclusions can be drawn about the causal relationship
between sports participation and youth developmental outcomes. Given the focus of
policymakers and health professionals on sport as a means to achieve wider social
and educational outcomes for young people, including in the Netherlands, further 
research is needed to shed light on the relationship between sports participation
and youth developmental outcomes for socially vulnerable youth, with a special
focus on this group's heterogeneity.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Trialregister.nl NTR4621 Date of Registration: 2 June 2014
(retrospectively registered).

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-018-5955-y 
PMCID: PMC6094908
PMID: 30111309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Front Psychiatry. 2018 Jul 31;9:348. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00348. eCollection
2018.

Psychosocial Predictors of Postpartum Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in Women With
a Traumatic Childbirth Experience.

van Heumen MA(1), Hollander MH(1), van Pampus MG(2), van Dillen J(1), Stramrood
CAI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Onze Lieve Vrouwe Gasthuis,
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, Netherlands.

Objective: To analyze the predictive value of antepartum vulnerability factors,
such as social support, coping, history of psychiatric disease, and fear of
childbirth, and intrapartum events on the development of symptoms of postpartum
posttraumatic stress disorder (PP-PTSD) in women with a traumatic childbirth
experience. Materials and methods: Women with at least one self-reported
traumatic childbirth experience in or after 2005 were invited to participate
through various social media platforms in March 2016. They completed a 35-item
questionnaire including validated screening instruments for PTSD (PTSD Symptom
Checklist, PCL-5), social support (Oslo social support scale, OSS-3), and coping 
(Antonovsky's sense of coherence scale, SoC). Results: Of the 1,599 women who
completed the questionnaire, 17.4% met the diagnostic criteria for current PTSD
according to the DSM-5, and another 26.0% recognized the symptoms from a previous
period, related to giving birth. Twenty-six percent of the participating women
had received one or more psychiatric diagnoses at some point in their life, and
five percent of all women had been diagnosed with PTSD prior to their traumatic
childbirth experience. Women with poor (OR = 15.320, CI = 8.001-29.336), or
moderate (OR = 3.208, CI = 1.625-6.333) coping skills were more likely to report 
PP-PTSD symptoms than women with good coping skills. Low social support was
significantly predictive for current PP-PTSD symptoms compared to high social
support (OR = 5.557, CI = 2.967-7.785). A predictive model which could
differentiate between women fulfilling vs. not fulfilling the symptom criteria
for PTSD had a sensitivity of 80.8% and specificity of 62.6% with an accuracy of 
66.5%. Conclusions: Low social support, poor coping, experiencing "threatened
death" and experiencing "actual or threatened injury to the baby" were the four
significant factors in the predictive model for women with a traumatic childbirth
experience to be at risk of developing PP-PTSD. Further research should
investigate the effects of interventions aimed at the prevention of PP-PTSD by
strengthening coping skills and increasing social support, especially in women at
increased risk of unfavorable obstetrical outcomes.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00348 
PMCID: PMC6079202
PMID: 30108530 


288. Psychophysiology. 2020 Jan;57(1):e13271. doi: 10.1111/psyp.13271. Epub 2018 Aug
13.

Victims of war-Psychoendocrine evidence for the impact of traumatic stress on
psychological well-being of adolescents growing up during the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.

Shaheen M(1), Schindler L(2), Saar-Ashkenazy R(3)(4), Bani Odeh K(1), Soreq H(5),
Friedman A(3)(6), Kirschbaum C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Public Health, Al-Quds University, Abu Dees, West Bank-Palestine.
(2)Department of Psychology, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(3)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience and Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience,
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel.
(4)Department of Psychology and School of Social Work, Ashkelon Academic College,
Ashkelon, Israel.
(5)The Edmond and Lily Safra Center of Brain Science and the Department of
Biological Chemistry, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(6)Department of Medical Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

Violent conflicts are severe traumatic stressors with detrimental effects on
physical and mental health, with children and adolescents being particularly at
risk. For the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, characteristic patterns 
of dysregulation in trauma-exposed individuals have been shown. This study set
out to investigate self-reported mental well-being in Palestinian adolescents
growing up during the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Hair cortisol concentrations 
(HCC) as a psychoendocrine marker for long-term HPA axis aberrations along with
the potential protective factor sense of coherence (SoC; i.e., the global mindset
to interpret the world and emerging stressors as comprehensible, manageable, and 
meaningful) were examined. Between 2014 and 2016, posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD), depression, anxiety, HCC, and SoC were examined in 233 adolescents aged
11 to 16 from the West Bank. More than half of the participants reported trauma
exposure, with 40% fulfilling the criteria of a preliminary PTSD diagnosis and a 
high prevalence of anxiety and depression. HCC was significantly elevated in the 
PTSD subgroup compared to the subgroup not exposed to any traumatic events
(p = 0.046), with trauma-exposed individuals in between. HCC was further
associated with typical sequelae of traumatic stress. Notably, SoC was inversely 
related to self-reported psychopathology, as well as to HCC in the trauma group. 
The results illustrate the situation of adolescents exposed to chronic traumatic 
stress and extend the literature on aberrant HPA axis functioning under such
conditions. They also point out a central role of SoC, which may imply new
strategies to aid individuals exposed to ongoing conflicts.

© 2018 Society for Psychophysiological Research.

DOI: 10.1111/psyp.13271 
PMID: 30101980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Health Promot Int. 2019 Oct 1;34(5):1045-1054. doi: 10.1093/heapro/day051.

An experiential learning theory of high level wellness: Australian salutogenic
research.

Allen C(1), Boddy J(1), Kendall E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Menzies Health Institute Queensland, The Hopkins Centre, and the School of
Human Services and Social Work, Griffith University, Logan, Australia.

At the broadest level, salutogenesis refers to an emphasis on the origins of
health, as opposed to a predilection with the determinants of disease. Kickbusch 
urges health promotion professionals to adopt a salutogenic orientation;
directing research and practice towards the question of 'what creates health?'
This salutogenic study focused on the most pleasant part of the health continuum 
by asking: (i) what is high level wellness and (ii) how do people attain and
maintain this way of being? Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 25
Australian adults who reported a 'high' or 'very high' level of wellness, health 
and happiness. Participants described what high level wellness meant to them,
their wellness journeys, and the things that helped and hindered their wellbeing.
This information was coded, compared and crafted into a constructivist grounded
theory. Our interpretation of the data suggests that high level wellness is the
sense of peace (wellbeing) that comes from knowing, liking and being one's best
self. Happy, healthy people seem to attain and maintain this way of being over
time, through a series of self-initiated experiential learning cycles. The
'experiential learning theory of high level wellness' links and extends
literature on salutogenesis, eudaimonic wellbeing, self-actualization and
experiential learning; positioning everyday people as the leaders of their own
life-long wellness journeys. It also suggests a new dimension for Antonovsky's
salutogenic theory: aspiring, not just adapting. Future research could explore
the utility of our approach with a range of populations and professions,
progressing towards 'high level wellness for all'.

© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/day051 
PMID: 30101338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Comp Migr Stud. 2018;6(1):21. doi: 10.1186/s40878-018-0088-0. Epub 2018 Jul 20.

Narratives of meaningful endurance - how migrant women escape the vicious cycle
between health problems and unemployment.

Slootjes J(1), Keuzenkamp S(2)(3), Saharso S(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)1Berkeley Interdisciplinary Migration Initiative/D-Lab, UC Berkeley, Barrows
Hall, Room 350H, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA.
(2)Movisie - Netherlands Centre for Social Development, Catharijnesingel 47, 3511
GC Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)3Department of Sociology, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Boelelaan 1105, 1081
HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)4University of Humanistic Studies, Kromme Nieuwegracht 29, 3512 HD Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

Migrant women in Europe have a higher incidence of health problems and have
disproportionately high unemployment rates. We examine how Dutch and Turkish,
Moroccan and Surinamese first and second generation migrant women escape the
vicious cycle between health problems and unemployment by using the theory of the
Sense of Coherence (SOC). We study how SOC works and whether SOC is also
applicable outside the domain of health. Our findings from life story interviews 
(N = 54) show that women can escape this vicious cycle through the meaningful
reconstruction of adversity. Women can put a halt on the on-going negative chain 
reaction through focusing on the meaning and purpose of adversity. We name such
life stories narratives of meaningful endurance, which are characterized by
structure, authorship and meaningful reconstruction, in opposition to its
counterpart, narratives of non-directional distress. The three respective
components of SOC - comprehensibility, manageability and meaningfulness - enable 
the attainment of a narrative of meaningful endurance and individuals with a
stronger SOC are more likely to tell narratives of meaningful endurance.
Theoretical and policy implications of our findings are discussed.

DOI: 10.1186/s40878-018-0088-0 
PMCID: PMC6061105
PMID: 30101079 

Conflict of interest statement: All research participants were informed about the
confidential and anonymous nature of the research and signed a informed consent
form before the start of the interviews. According to Dutch law, there was no
need for ethical approval for this particular research project. However, we
uphold the highest ethical standards while conducting this research and took
elaborate measures to ensure the anonymity and confidentiality of the research
participants’ information.Not applicable.The authors declare that they have no
competing interests.Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


291. BMC Palliat Care. 2018 Aug 8;17(1):100. doi: 10.1186/s12904-018-0353-x.

How can end of life care excellence be normalized in hospitals? Lessons from a
qualitative framework study.

Noble C(1)(2)(3), Grealish L(4)(5), Teodorczuk A(6), Shanahan B(5), Hiremagular
B(5), Morris J(7), Yardley S(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Education Unit, Gold Coast Health, Level 2 PED Building, 1 Hospital
Boulevard, Southport, QLD, 4215, Australia. c.noble@griffith.edu.au.
(2)School of Medicine, Griffith University, Griffith, QLD, Australia.
c.noble@griffith.edu.au.
(3)School of Pharmacy, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
c.noble@griffith.edu.au.
(4)School of Nursing and Midwifery and Menzies Health Institute Queensland,
Griffith University, Griffith, Queensland, Australia.
(5)Gold Coast Health, Griffith, QLD, Australia.
(6)School of Medicine, Griffith University, Griffith, QLD, Australia.
(7)Myton Hospices, Coventry, UK.
(8)Central and North West London NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(9)Marie Curie Research Department, University College London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: There is a pressing need to improve end-of-life care in acute
settings. This requires meeting the learning needs of all acute care healthcare
professionals to develop broader clinical expertise and bring about positive
change. The UK experience with the Liverpool Care of the Dying Pathway (LCP),
also demonstrates a greater focus on implementation processes and daily working
practices is necessary.
METHODS: This qualitative study, informed by Normalisation Process Theory (NPT), 
investigates how a tool for end-of-life care was embedded in a large Australian
teaching hospital. The study identified contextual barriers and facilitators
captured in real time, as the 'Clinical Guidelines for Dying Patients' (CgDp)
were implemented. A purposive sample of 28 acute ward (allied health 7 [including
occupational therapist, pharmacists, physiotherapist, psychologist, speech
pathologist], nursing 10, medical 8) and palliative care (medical 2, nursing 1)
staff participated. Interviews (n = 18) and focus groups (n = 2), were
audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim. Data were analysed using an a priori
framework of NPT constructs; coherence, cognitive participation, collective
action and reflexive monitoring.
RESULTS: The CgDp afforded staff support, but the reality of the clinical process
was invariably perceived as more complex than the guidelines suggested. The CgDp 
'made sense' to nursing and medical staff, but, because allied health staff were 
not ward-based, they were not as engaged (coherence). Implementation was
challenged by competing concerns in the acute setting where most patients
required a different care approach (cognitive participation). The CgDp is
designed to start when a patient is dying, yet staff found it difficult to
diagnose dying. Staff were concerned that they lacked ready access to experts
(collective action) to support this. Participants believed using CgDp improved
patient care, but there was an absence of participation in real time monitoring
or quality improvement activity.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose a model, which addresses the risks and barriers
identified, to guide implementation of end-of-life care tools in acute settings. 
The model promotes interprofessional and interdisciplinary working and learning
strategies to develop capabilities for embedding end of life (EOL) care
excellence whilst guided by experienced palliative care teams. Further research
is needed to determine if this model can be prospectively applied to positively
influence EOL practices.

DOI: 10.1186/s12904-018-0353-x 
PMCID: PMC6083610
PMID: 30089484  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Cortex. 2018 Nov;108:1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2018.07.002. Epub 2018 Jul 17.

Boundary extension is attenuated in patients with ventromedial prefrontal cortex 
damage.

De Luca F(1), McCormick C(2), Mullally SL(3), Intraub H(4), Maguire EA(2),
Ciaramelli E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Psicologia and Centro studi e ricerche di Neuroscienze
Cognitive, Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, Institute of Neurology, University
College London, London, UK.
(3)Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK.
(4)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Delaware,
Newark, USA.
(5)Dipartimento di Psicologia and Centro studi e ricerche di Neuroscienze
Cognitive, Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy. Electronic address:
elisa.ciaramelli@unibo.it.

The ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and hippocampus have been implicated
in the mental construction of scenes and events. However, little is known about
their specific contributions to these cognitive functions. Boundary extension
(BE) is a robust indicator of fast, automatic, and implicit scene construction.
BE occurs when individuals who are viewing scenes automatically imagine what
might be beyond the view, and consequently later misremember having seen a
greater expanse of the scene. Patients with hippocampal damage show attenuated BE
because of their scene construction impairment. In the current study, we
administered BE tasks to patients with vmPFC damage, brain-damaged control
patients, and healthy control participants. We also contrasted the performance of
these patients to the previously-published data from patients with hippocampal
lesions (Mullally, Intraub, & Maguire, 2012). We found that vmPFC-damaged
patients showed reduced BE compared to brain-damaged and healthy controls.
Indeed, BE attenuation was similar following vmPFC or hippocampal damage.
Notably, however, whereas hippocampal damage seems to particularly impair the
spatial coherence of scenes, vmPFC damage leads to a difficulty constructing
scenes in a broader sense, with the prediction of what should be in a scene, and 
the monitoring or integration of the scene elements being particularly
compromised. We conclude that vmPFC and hippocampus play important and
complementary roles in scene construction.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2018.07.002 
PMCID: PMC6238077
PMID: 30086391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Front Psychol. 2018 Jul 20;9:1258. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01258. eCollection
2018.

Syrian Adolescent Refugees: How Do They Cope During Their Stay in Refugee Camps?

Braun-Lewensohn O(1), Al-Sayed K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Conflict Management & Resolution Program, Department of Multidisciplinary
Studies, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel.
(2)Kaye Academic College of Education, Beersheba, Israel.

To date, more than 11 million Syrians have been forced from their homes due to
the civil war in that country. However, little research has been done on
adolescent Syrian refugees. This study aimed to fill that gap in the research
literature by examining how adolescent Syrian refugees cope with the harsh
situation of having fled from their homes. We explored how personal capital
factors, sense of coherence (SOC), wishes, and expectations, as well as
socio-demographic and situational factors, contribute to a variety of mental
health and psychological problems, namely, internalizing and externalizing
problems and post-traumatic stress symptoms. Data were gathered from 110
adolescents aged 13-18 of whom 50.9% were boys. Participants filled out
self-report questionnaires that asked about demographics, exposure to war,
appraisal of danger, receiving aid, SOC, wishes, and expectations. They also
completed the Achenbach Youth Form. The results show that girls appraised their
situation as more dangerous and reported more internalizing, externalizing, and
post-traumatic stress symptoms. By contrast, boys reported more exposure to war
experiences and stronger SOC. Younger adolescents reported stronger SOC, while
older adolescents reported more psychological problems. The adolescents who had
more recently arrived in the refugee camp were in better condition, thereby
reporting stronger SOC, higher expectations, and fewer psychological problems.
The amount of time spent in the refugee camp, gender, exposure to war situations,
and appraisal of danger all contributed to the explained variance in the
different psychological problems. However, once the personal resource SOC was
entered into the model, it mediated the relationships between all of the
socio-demographic and situational variables, on the one hand, and the examined
psychological problems, on the other. The results are discussed based on the
personal-capital model of salutogenesis and its relations with traumatic stress.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01258 
PMCID: PMC6063162
PMID: 30079046 


294. Gac Sanit. 2019 Jul - Aug;33(4):310-316. doi: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2018.02.009. Epub 
2018 Aug 2.

[Validity and reliability of the sense of coherence scale among nursing
undergraduate students from a Spanish university].

[Article in Spanish]

Vega Martínez MDC(1), Frías Osuna A(2), Del Pino Casado R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Enfermería Familiar y Comunitaria, Centro de Salud de Santa Ponça, Palma de
Mallorca, España.
(2)Departamento de Enfermería, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad de
Jaén, Jaén, España.
(3)Departamento de Enfermería, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad de
Jaén, Jaén, España. Electronic address: rdelpino@ujaen.com.

Comment in
    Gac Sanit. 2019 Nov - Dec;33(6):599.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the factor structure of the OLQ-13 scale and to study the
direct relationship between sense of coherence and lifestyles in university
students of nursing.
METHOD: Cross-sectional study.
LOCATION: University of Jaén. Andalusia, Spain.
PARTICIPANTS: 384 students from the first three years of the nursing degree in
the University of Jaén.
MAIN MEASUREMENT: Internal consistency was studied by Cronbach's alpha,
reliability test-retest was measured by intraclass coefficient correlation (ICC) 
and construct validity was analysed by exploratory factor analysis, confirmatory 
factor analysis and known-groups technique.
RESULTS: The internal consistency of the scale was adequate (Cronbach α = 0.809).
The ICC for the reliability test-retest was 0.91. The exploratory factor analysis
showed 3 factors explaining 50.13% of the variance. The confirmatory factor
analysis showed f goodness-of-fit indexes for the proposed model CFI=0.965;
RMSA=0.041; GFI=0.963; SRMR=0.041. Statistically significant differences in sense
of coherence were found among the subgroups of students with healthy and
unhealthy lifestyles (p <0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The study confirms the multidimensionality of the OLQ-13 scale, in
which 3 factors were identified: external meaningful, comprehensibility and
manageability, and internal comprehensibility and manageability. The OLQ-13 may
be a valid and reliable scale for use in the Spanish university population.

Copyright © 2018. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2018.02.009 
PMID: 30078500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2018 Oct;298(4):737-745. doi: 10.1007/s00404-018-4853-y.
Epub 2018 Aug 3.

Impact of a cervical dysplasia and its treatment on quality of life and sexual
function.

Heinzler J(1), Brucker J(1), Bruckner T(2), Dinkic C(1), Hoffmann J(3), Dornhöfer
N(3), Seitz S(4), Sohn C(1), Rom J(1), Schott TC(5), Schott S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 440, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Institut für Medizinische Biometrie Und Informatik, Universitätsklinik
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Universitätsfrauenklinik Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Caritas-Krankenhaus St. Josef Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(5)Poliklinik für Kieferorthopädie, Universitätsklinik Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 440, Heidelberg, Germany. sarah.schott@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

PURPOSE: In this case-control study, the impact on quality of life and sexual
function in women with cervical dysplasia and conization will be evaluated, in
order to address coping with such a premalignant lesion and to improve strategies
for salutogenesis.
METHODS: This multicenter case-control study evaluates women at special dysplasia
outpatient clinic (T1) as well as 3 (T2) and 6 (T3) months after the diagnosis of
a dysplasia. The women were subgrouped upon dysplasia only (S2) or dysplasia with
conization (S1). Sexual function as well as cervix-related and general quality of
life was assessed using validated instruments (FSFI-d, EORTC-QLQ-CX24, SF-36).
RESULTS: Women with dysplasia had a lower sexual functioning than controls (FSFI:
S1: 23.8 ± 9.7 (p < 0.003); S2: 25.3 ± 7.5 (p < 0.03); K: 29.1 ± 4.5) as well as 
a lower physical component score (SF-36: S1: 51.3 ± 8.6 (p < 0.02); S2:
51.7 ± 7.8 (p < 0.05); K: 54.2 ± 6.6) and had a significantly reduced body image 
(EORTC-QLQ-CX24: S1: 75.7 (p < 0.001); S2: 76.5 (p < 0.001), K:89.2). Sexual
functioning was not affected by conization in the observational period over
6 months; however, sexual worry was impacted. Over temporal progression women who
underwent conization worried more. Regression analysis revealed a cervical
dysplasia to impact sexual function.
CONCLUSION: Data suggest that women with the diagnosis of a cervical dysplasia
are impaired in their sexual function as well as general and cervix-related
quality of life, mostly independent of conization or further observation. To
improve salutogenesis in the long run, the communication on dysplasia and its
treatment strategy at the beginning, as well as part of aftercare, or
psychosomatic intervention, might be treatment options for women at risk.

DOI: 10.1007/s00404-018-4853-y 
PMID: 30076544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Evol Psychol. 2018 Jul-Sep;16(3):1474704918792134. doi: 10.1177/1474704918792134.

Traveling Groups Stick Together: How Collective Directional Movement Influences
Social Cohesion.

Wilson S(1), Bassiou E(1), Denli A(1), Dolan LC(1), Watson M(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Psychology and Sociology, Queen Margaret University, Edinburgh, 
Scotland, United Kingdom.
(2)2 Department of Psychology, University of Sunderland, Sunderland, United
Kingdom.

We tested the hypothesis that the social act of moving through space with
others-collective directional movement-is associated with greater levels of group
cohesion compared to static activities. We asked participants to imagine
participating in activities as part of a same-sex group and found that imagining 
going on a journey is associated with higher levels of expected cohesion compared
to imagining attending a meeting (Study 1) or an event (Study 2). Study 3
replicates the main effect using different manipulations and finds that it
persists regardless of whether the imagined group were friends or strangers. Two 
further studies employed real-world tasks and show that the effect is not a
consequence of goal ascription (Study 4) or synchrony/exertion (Study 5). We
argue that the link between this activity and cohesion is a consequence of its
ubiquity in social ecologies and the interdependence and shared common fate of
those engaged in it.

DOI: 10.1177/1474704918792134 
PMID: 30071757  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Environ Sci Technol. 2018 Sep 4;52(17):9545-9555. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.8b01781.
Epub 2018 Aug 24.

Advancing Environmental Epidemiology to Assess the Beneficial Influence of the
Natural Environment on Human Health and Well-Being.

Silva RA(1), Rogers K(2), Buckley TJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE) , U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency , Research Triangle Park , North Carolina 27711 , United
States.
(2)Office of Research and Development , U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ,
Research Triangle Park , North Carolina 27711 , United States.

Environmental health research can be oriented across a continuum of effects
ranging from adverse to cobenefits to salutogenic. We argue that the salutogenic 
end of the continuum is insufficiently represented in research and as a basis for
environmental protection, even though there is growing evidence that the natural 
environment plays a critical role in blunting adverse effects and promoting human
health and well-being. Thus, we advocate for advancing environmental health
research through environmental epidemiology that more fully and directly accounts
for the salutogenic effects of the natural environment on individual well-being
by (1) defining "natural environments" broadly, from pristine natural areas to
urban green infrastructure; (2) considering exposure comprehensively to encompass
residential, occupational, and recreational settings, local and distant,
day-to-day and occasional; (3) doing individual-level assessments that include
both health and well-being outcomes and one's experience of nature, including
potential mediation by connectedness to nature and individual perceptions and
preferences, as well as sociocultural and demographic effect modifiers; and (4)
collecting longitudinal and nationally representative data.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.est.8b01781 
PMID: 30064205  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Schizophr Res. 2019 Feb;204:214-221. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2018.07.036. Epub 2018
Jul 26.

Neural correlates of reality filtering in schizophrenia spectrum disorder.

Thézé R(1), Manuel AL(1), Pedrazzini E(1), Chantraine F(2), Patru MC(2), Nahum
L(1), Guggisberg AG(1), Schnider A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cognitive Neurorehabilitation, Division of Neurorehabilitation, 
Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University Hospital and University of
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Mental Health and Psychiatry, University Hospital of Geneva,
Switzerland.
(3)Laboratory of Cognitive Neurorehabilitation, Division of Neurorehabilitation, 
Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University Hospital and University of
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. Electronic address: armin.schnider@hcuge.ch.

BACKGROUND: A false sense of reality is a characteristic of schizophrenia
spectrum disorders (SSD). Reality confusion may also emanate from posterior
orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) lesions, as evident in confabulations that patients
act upon and disorientation. This confusion can be measured by repeated runs of a
continuous recognition task (CRT): patients increase their false positive rate
from the second run on, failing to realize that an item is not a repetition
within the current run. Correct handling of these stimuli, a faculty called
orbitofrontal reality filtering (ORFi), induces a distinct frontal potential at
200-300 ms, the "ORFi potential". Patients with schizophrenia have been reported 
to fail in this task, too. Here, we explored the electrophysiology of ORFi in
SSD.
METHODS: Evoked potentials, source, and connectivity analyses derived from
high-density electroencephalograms of 17 patients with SSD and 15 age-matched
healthy controls performing two runs of a CRT.
RESULTS: Although the patients obtained normal performance, they did not normally
express the frontal potential typical of ORFi between 200 and 300 ms. Coherence
analysis demonstrated virtually absent functional connectivity in the theta band 
within the memory network in this period. Source analysis showed increased
activity in left medial temporal and prefrontal regions in patients.
CONCLUSIONS: SSD patients appear to invoke compensatory resources to handle the
challenges of reality filtering. An abnormal ORFi potential may be an early
biomarker of SSD.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2018.07.036 
PMID: 30057100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Midwifery. 2018 Sep;64:124-127. doi: 10.1016/j.midw.2018.06.006. Epub 2018 Jun
18.

Developing a case based learning curriculum with a salutogenic perspective.

Ridley N(1), Byrom A(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Central Lancashire, UK. Electronic address:
nridley1@uclan.ac.uk.
(2)University of Central Lancashire, UK.

At the University of Central Lancashire, in the North West of England, United
Kingdom (UK) the midwifery team introduced a new and innovative case-based
learning (CBL) curriculum for the undergraduate midwifery course. CBL is a
student-centred approach to teaching and learning and encourages students to
learn from each other, develop essential skills when caring for women and
families including collaborative working and effective communication. In this
article we share our approach and experiences of developing and delivering a CBL 
curriculum informed by salutogenesis, including how it enabled us to support
effective learning and skill development for women and families.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.midw.2018.06.006 
PMID: 30056934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Soc Sci Med. 2018 Sep;213:37-44. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2018.07.034. Epub 2018 
Jul 21.

Pathogenic or health-promoting? How food is framed in healthy living media for
women.

Rodney A(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Toronto, Department of Sociology, 725 Spadina Avenue, M5S 2J4,
Toronto ON, Canada. Electronic address: arodney@uoguelph.ca.

In this paper, I investigate the contribution of healthy living blogs to
discourse about healthy eating, seeking to understand how blogs compare to
mass-media magazine sources. This is done by comparatively analysing 459 healthy 
living blog posts and 141 health and fitness magazine articles. These were
collected between 2011 and 2013 and provide rich data about what food content
looks like in media designed for an audience of American women. I analyze how
each source establishes the purpose of healthy eating and what foods are
considered part of a healthy diet. While both sites are embedded in an
overarching discourse of healthy eating, there are important contrasts between
the frames used and ideologies they draw from. The magazines largely frame food
as pathogenic, emphasizing food's connection to overweight/obesity, positioning
particular foods ('scapegoat foods') as related to weight gain, and encouraging
restriction of these foods. In contrast, the blogs predominantly frame food as
"salutogenic" meaning that it is capable of promoting health and wellbeing. The
blogs position food as a conduit for pleasure and an inclusive, varied diet is
modelled. The pathogenic frame in the magazines reflects values inherent to
hegemonic anti-obesity ideology while the salutogenic frame in blogs reflects a
Health at Every Size® ideology. This paper argues that healthy living bloggers
are able to broaden the range of mainstream healthy eating discourses, albeit
without critiquing the moralization of health or thinness, because of their race,
class and body privilege.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2018.07.034 
PMID: 30056325  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Asian J Psychiatr. 2018 Aug;36:102-107. doi: 10.1016/j.ajp.2018.06.012. Epub 2018
Jun 25.

Antenatal depressive symptoms during late pregnancy among women in a
north-eastern province of Thailand: Prevalence and associated factors.

Phoosuwan N(1), Eriksson L(2), Lundberg PC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Uppsala 
University, Sweden; Department of Community Health, Faculty of Public Health,
Kasetsart University Chalermphrakiat Sakonnakhon Province Campus, Thailand.
Electronic address: nitikorn.phoosuwan@pubcare.uu.se.
(2)Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Uppsala 
University, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Globally, depression is prevalent during pregnancy and several
factors have been associated with antenatal depressive symptoms (ADS). However,
ADS have rarely been investigated in Thailand. This study aimed at exploring the 
prevalence of ADS and factors associated with these symptoms among Thai women in 
late pregnancy.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study including 449 women in late pregnancy was
carried out. The Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) was used to detect
depressive symptoms with a score of 10 points or higher. Socio-demographic
characteristics and psychosocial risks were measured in association with ADS.
Percentage and 95% confidence interval (CI) were used to assess the prevalence of
ADS. Odds ratio (OR) and 95%CI were used to determine ADS-related risk factors
among women.
RESULTS: The prevalence of ADS was 46.8% (95%CI 42.3-51.4). Pregnant women aged
less than 20 years (OR 2.58, 95%CI 1.14-5.84) and those not having enough money
(OR 2.71, 95%CI 1.22-6.05) had an increased risk of ADS. Psychosocial risks
related to ADS for women were low psychological well-being (OR 3.12, 95%CI
1.75-5.58), low self-esteem (OR 2.08, 95%CI 1.24-3.49), and low sense of
coherence (OR 1.82, 95%CI 1.12-2.95).
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of ADS among Thai women in their late pregnancy is
high. Socio-demographic characteristics and psychosocial factors are
independently associated with ADS. Healthcare providers in Thailand should
consider EPDS as a standardised screening tool for ADS and use it at antenatal
care clinics. Implementing programs focusing on both pregnant women and their
family might increase the prevention of perinatal depression.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajp.2018.06.012 
PMID: 30055513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Qual Health Res. 2018 Sep;28(11):1719-1734. doi: 10.1177/1049732318786944. Epub
2018 Jul 21.

Living Life and Doing Things Together: Collaborative Research With Couples Where 
One Partner Has a Diagnosis of Dementia.

Bielsten T(1), Lasrado R(2), Keady J(2), Kullberg A(3), Hellström I(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Linköping University, Norrköping, Sweden.
(2)2 University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(3)3 Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.

The aim of this study is to identify relevant content for a self-management guide
by using the outcomes of previous research in combination with knowledge and
experiences from couples where one partner has a diagnosis of dementia. The study
was carried out in three phases: (a) literature search of previous research
related to well-being and couplehood in dementia; (b) interviews with couples
with dementia based on the findings of the literature search; and (c) further
authentication of the findings within expert groups of people with dementia and
carers. For analysis of data, we used a hybrid approach of thematic analysis with
combined deductive and inductive approaches. The findings of this study indicated
that the four main themes "Home and Neighborhood," "Meaningful Activities and
Relationships," "Approach and Empowerment," and "Couplehood" with related
subthemes could be appropriate targets for a self-management guide for couples
where one partner has a diagnosis of dementia.

DOI: 10.1177/1049732318786944 
PMID: 30033851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Br J Health Psychol. 2018 Nov;23(4):949-966. doi: 10.1111/bjhp.12332. Epub 2018
Jul 16.

Medication adherence for resistant hypertension: Assessing theoretical predictors
of adherence using direct and indirect adherence measures.

Durand H(1), Hayes P(2), Harhen B(3), Conneely A(4), Finn DP(4), Casey M(2),
Murphy AW(2)(5), Molloy GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medication Adherence Across the Lifespan (MEDAL) Group, School of Psychology, 
National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
(2)Discipline of General Practice, School of Medicine, National University of
Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
(3)National Centre for Biomedical Engineering Science, National University of
Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
(4)Discipline of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, School of Medicine, National
University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
(5)Health Research Board Primary Care Clinical Trials Network, Galway, Ireland.

OBJECTIVES: This study examined theoretical predictors of long-term medication
adherence (i.e., treatment-related beliefs, coherence of beliefs from experience 
with medication, habit strength, and pill burden) for patients with apparent
treatment-resistant hypertension in primary care, using a composite adherence
score derived from direct and indirect measures (i.e., prescription refill,
self-report, and bioanalytical assays of urine).
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
METHODS: Individual patient records were screened for prescription refill
adherence. Patients provided a urine sample for adherence screening and completed
a battery of psychometric scales, including two self-report adherence measures
(N = 204). Convergence of adherence measures was assessed, a composite adherence 
score was calculated, and hierarchical multiple regression was used to examine
the role of theoretical predictors of adherence.
RESULTS: Non-adherence estimates ranged from 20.3 to 41.1%, depending on the
assessment method used. Associations among adherence measures were weak to
moderate (ρ = .00-.53). Medication-taking habit strength was the strongest
predictor of adherence, explaining 19% incremental variance in adherence beyond
treatment-related beliefs. Beliefs and coherence did not predict adherence, even 
for patients with weaker habits. Pill burden was not associated with habit
strength or adherence for this sample.
CONCLUSIONS: Associations among unique adherence measures were weak overall,
providing further evidence that multiple measures are necessary to accurately
assess adherence. Habit strength is a key predictor of adherence for chronic
conditions. Both habit strength and pill burden represent important intervention 
targets for improving long-term medication adherence. Longitudinal inception
studies are needed to properly test Common-Sense Model propositions and elucidate
the role of beliefs, coherence, and habits in predicting adherence at various
stages of the chronic illness trajectory. Statement of contribution What is
already known on this subject? Non-adherence to antihypertensives is a leading
cause of apparent treatment-resistant hypertension (aTRH). Behaviour maintenance 
(vs. initiation) factors may be more predictive of long-term adherence. What does
this study add? Associations among direct and indirect measures of adherence are 
generally weak. Habit strength is the strongest predictor of long-term adherence 
for aTRH in primary care. Inception studies are needed to further validate
Common-Sense Model propositions.

© 2018 The British Psychological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bjhp.12332 
PMID: 30014548  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Jul 31;115(31):7879-7883. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1806998115. Epub 2018 Jul 16.

Electrometry by optical charge conversion of deep defects in 4H-SiC.

Wolfowicz G(1)(2), Whiteley SJ(1)(3), Awschalom DD(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Engineering, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637.
(2)Advanced Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8577,
Japan.
(3)Department of Physics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637.
(4)Institute for Molecular Engineering, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637; awsch@uchicago.edu.
(5)Institute for Molecular Engineering and Materials Science Division, Argonne
National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439.

Optically active point defects in various host materials, such as diamond and
silicon carbide (SiC), have shown significant promise as local sensors of
magnetic fields, electric fields, strain, and temperature. Modern sensing
techniques take advantage of the relaxation and coherence times of the spin state
within these defects. Here we show that the defect charge state can also be used 
to sense the environment, in particular high-frequency (megahertz to gigahertz)
electric fields, complementing established spin-based techniques. This is enabled
by optical charge conversion of the defects between their photoluminescent and
dark charge states, with conversion rate dependent on the electric field (energy 
density). The technique provides an all-optical high-frequency electrometer which
is tested in 4H-SiC for both ensembles of divacancies and silicon vacancies, from
cryogenic to room temperature, and with a measured sensitivity of [Formula: see
text] Finally, due to the piezoelectric character of SiC, we obtain spatial 3D
maps of surface acoustic wave modes in a mechanical resonator.

Copyright © 2018 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1806998115 
PMCID: PMC6077694
PMID: 30012622 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


305. J Neurosci. 2018 Aug 8;38(32):7158-7169. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0436-18.2018.
Epub 2018 Jul 13.

A Generic Mechanism for Perceptual Organization in the Parietal Cortex.

Grassi PR(1)(2)(3), Zaretskaya N(4)(2)(3)(5), Bartels A(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, Pablo.grassi@cin.uni-tuebingen.de
andreas.bartels@tuebingen.mpg.de.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, 72076 Tübingen, Germany, and.
(4)Centre for Integrative Neuroscience.
(5)Institute of Psychology, University of Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria.

Our visual system's ability to group visual elements into meaningful entities and
to separate them from others is referred to as scene segmentation. Visual motion 
often provides a powerful cue for this process as parallax or coherence can
inform the visual system about scene or object structure. Here we tested the
hypothesis that scene segmentation by motion cues relies on a common neural
substrate in the parietal cortex. We used fMRI and a set of three entirely
distinct motion stimuli to examine scene segmentation in the human brain. The
stimuli covered a wide range of high-level processes, including perceptual
grouping, transparent motion, and depth perception. All stimuli were perceptually
bistable such that percepts alternated every few seconds while the physical
stimulation remained constant. The perceptual states were asymmetric, in that one
reflected the default (nonsegmented) interpretation, and the other the
non-default (segmented) interpretation. We confirmed behaviorally that upon
stimulus presentation, the default percept was always perceived first, before
perceptual alternations ensued. Imaging results showed that across all stimulus
classes perceptual scene-segmentation was associated with an increase of activity
in the posterior parietal cortex together with a decrease of neural signal in the
early visual cortex. This pattern of activation is compatible with predictive
coding models of visual perception, and suggests that parietal cortex hosts a
generic mechanism for scene segmentation.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Making sense of
cluttered visual scenes is crucial for everyday perception. An important cue to
scene segmentation is visual motion: slight movements of scene elements give away
which elements belong to the foreground or background or to the same object. We
used three distinct stimuli that engage visual scene segmentation mechanisms
based on motion. They involved perceptual grouping, transparent motion, and depth
perception. Brain activity associated with all three mechanisms converged in the 
same parietal region with concurrent deactivation of early visual areas. The
results suggest that posterior parietal cortex is a hub involved in structuring
visual scenes based on different motion cues, and that feedback modulates early
cortical processing in accord with predictive coding theory.

Copyright © 2018 the authors 0270-6474/18/387158-12$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0436-18.2018 
PMCID: PMC6596091
PMID: 30006362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Clin Nurs. 2018 Dec;27(23-24):4290-4301. doi: 10.1111/jocn.14621. Epub 2018 Jul
27.

Health-promoting leadership: A qualitative study from experienced nurses'
perspective.

Furunes T(1)(2)(3), Kaltveit A(4), Akerjordet K(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Norwegian School of Hotel Management, Faculty of Social Sciences,
Universitetet i Stavanger, Stavanger, Norway.
(2)University of Queensland, Business School, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(3)Hogeschool van Arnhem en Nijmegen, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(4)Stavanger Kommune, Stavanger, Norway.
(5)Faculty of Health Sciences, Universitetet i Stavanger, Stavanger, Norway.
(6)School of Psychology, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW, Australia.

AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: To increase knowledge about experienced nurses'
understanding of a health-promoting work environment, health-promoting leadership
and its role in retention of staff in the nursing workplace.
BACKGROUND: The quality of leadership is imperative in creating supportive and
health-promoting work environments to ensure workforce productivity and ethically
sustainable caring cultures. More knowledge on how leaders can promote health and
sustainable careers among nurses is needed. At a time of current and projected
nursing shortage, it is important to understand the reasons why nurses intend to 
remain in their jobs.
DESIGN: Qualitative descriptive.
METHOD: Twelve experienced registered nurses participated in an individual,
digitally recorded, semi-structured interview. Data were transcribed verbatim and
subjected to qualitative content analysis of manifest and latent content.
RESULTS: A health-promoting work environment should provide autonomy,
participation in decision-making, skills development and social support.
Health-promoting leaders should be attentive and take action.
CONCLUSION: Health-promoting work environments enable nurses to flourish. Having 
ample autonomy is therefore important to nurses so that when they face new
challenges, they see them as a way of using and developing their competencies.
Although most nurses claim their own leaders are not health promoting, they have 
a clear understanding of how a health-promoting leader should act. The
health-promoting leader should not only be attentive and promote skills
development, but also cater for nurses' meaningfulness.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: Nurses in primary health care understand a
health-promoting work environment to be a workplace where they can develop, not
only clinical skills, but also flourish as human beings. Further, nurses find it 
health promoting to have a meaningful job, using their competence to make a
difference for patients and their families. Nurse Managers have an important role
in facilitating meaningfulness in nurses' jobs to retain nurses as a valuable
asset for the organisation.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jocn.14621 
PMID: 29987859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Psychiatr Pol. 2018 Apr 30;52(2):217-226. doi: 10.12740/PP/OnlineFirst/69697.
Epub 2017 Jun 29.

Schizophrenia and sense of coherence.

[Article in English, Polish]

Witkowska-Łuć B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instytut Pedagogiki i Psychologii, Uniwersytet Jana Kochanowskiego w Kielcach.

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of the study was to investigate the dependence between
the sense of coherence (SOC) and symptomatic improvement as it is the determinant
of recovery process of patients with schizophrenia spectrum disorders.
METHODS: The group of 134 patients was surveyed. 118 of them suffered from
paranoid schizophrenia and 16 suffered from schizoaffective disorders, all were
hospitalized in psychiatric clinics. Mean age was 36.22 years (SD = 8.51).
Research was based on the Orientation to Life Questionnaire by A. Antonovsky. The
level of psychopathological symptoms intensity was investigated twice, at the
start and at the end of hospitalization with the Positive and Negative Syndrome
Scale (PANSS). The rate of recovery was the margin between psychopathological
symptoms intensification at the beginning and at the end of hospitalization.
RESULTS: The analysis show that higher sense of comprehensibility (SOCCOM) favors
lesser intensity of negative symptoms and overall psychiatric symptomatology in
PANSS while starting the hospitalization. Also patients with higher level of
sense of coherence (SOC) show less negative symptoms escalation during hospital
admission. Results show that higher level of sense of coherence (SOC) and higher 
level of sense of comprehensibility (SOCCOM) coexist with lesser difference in
the intensification of psychopathological symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: This article tries to show the role of sense of coherence in the
recovery process among people with schizophrenic disorders. Coexistence of higher
sense of coherence with greater negative symptoms and psychopathological symptoms
can be perceived as an insight to the illness, which can be recognized as an
expression of recovery.

DOI: 10.12740/PP/OnlineFirst/69697 
PMID: 29975362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


308. BMC Public Health. 2018 Jul 4;18(1):823. doi: 10.1186/s12889-018-5756-3.

The TALENT II study: a randomized controlled trial assessing the impact of an
individual health management (IHM) on stress reduction.

Melchart D(1)(2), Wühr E(3), Wifling K(4), Bachmeier BE(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Director of the Competence Center for Complementary Medicine and Naturopathy
(CoCoNat), Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, D-80801,
Munich, Germany. Dieter.melchart@tum.de.
(2)Institute for Complementary and Integrative Medicine, University Hospital
Zurich and University of Zurich, CH-8091, Zurich, Switzerland.
Dieter.melchart@tum.de.
(3)Member of the faculty for Applied Health Care Science, Deggendorf Institute of
Technology DIT, D-94469, Deggendorf, Germany.
(4)Competence Center for Complementary Medicine and Naturopathy (CoCoNat),
Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, D-80801, Munich,
Germany.
(5)Institute of Laboratory Medicine, University Hospital, LMU Munich, Munich,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Unfavorable lifestyle factors influence the risk of stress disorders.
For risk reduction, lifestyle modifications, such as regular physical activity,
balanced nutrition and competence in stress management, are a means of choice.
The clinical study examines the efficacy of an intensive lifestyle intervention, 
named Individual Health Management (IHM), - with regard to a reduction of
perceived stress. The study is supported by the major regional health insurance, 
which conducts, in cooperation with the Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM)
hospital, Bad Kötzting, a local model project offering insurants the IHM program 
as prevention measure against stress and related aftermath.
METHODS: The study is a controlled, randomized, monocentric trial with a
12-months intervention phase. Feasible persons are checked according to inclusion
and exclusion criteria and assigned to the intervention or control group.
Randomization ratio is 1:1. (A) Participants of the intervention group receive
the lifestyle program IHM, have access to a web-based health portal (
www.viterio.de ), and join 3 full-day and 10 two-hour training sessions during
the first 3 months. During the remaining 9 months, 4 training sessions and a
weekly monitoring are performed with remote assistance. Besides measurement of
perceived stress, examinations include burnout symptoms, heart rate variability, 
laboratory and physical findings. Further patient reported outcomes are
documented (e.g. well-being, life satisfaction, severity of mood state, sense of 
coherence, psycho-vegetative test, cardio-metabolic risk factors, hypertension
and diabetes risk. (B) Participants in the control group have access to the
intensive lifestyle intervention IHM after a waiting period of at least 6 months.
Examinations are conducted at baseline, after 3 and 6 months and in the
intervention group additionally after 9 and 12 months. The confirmatory analysis 
examines the differences between the two groups with regard to changes in
perceived stress after 6 months compared to the initial value.
DISCUSSION: In order to enhance adherence, avoid attrition and to insure data
quality, different measures will be implemented in the study. Based on a blended 
learning concept including a web-based e-health tool named VITERIO®, the program 
promises to achieve sustainable effects in perceived stress.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: German Clinical Trial Register Freiburg (DRKS): DRKS00013040 
(date registered 2017-10-1).

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-018-5756-3 
PMCID: PMC6030744
PMID: 29973165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Cien Saude Colet. 2018 Jun;23(6):1791-1798. doi:
10.1590/1413-81232018236.05502018.

Regionalization and Health Networks.

[Article in English, Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the
publisher]

Viana ALD(1), Bousquat A(1), Melo GA(2), Negri Filho A(3), Medina MG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Saúde Pública, Universidade de São Paulo. Av. Dr. Arnaldo 715,
Cerqueira César. 01246-904. São Paulo SP Brasil. aylenebousquat@usp.br.
(2)Universidade Federal de São Paulo. São Paulo SP Brasil.
(3)Laboratório de Inovação, Hospital do Coração. São Paulo SP Brasil.
(4)Instituto de Saúde Coletiva, Universidade Federal da Bahia. Salvador BA
Brasil.

The aim of this article was to reflect on the challenges faced in building the
Health Regions and Networks in Brazil. These reflections result from studies
conducted in several health regions. The central challenges for the constitution 
of the Health Regions and Networks are as follows: the Care Model, Primary Health
Care, Care for Users with Chronic Diseases, and Hospital Care. In order to
consolidate the regions and networks the organization needs to incorporate an
ethical sense: focusing on social, public and individual needs, derived from
comprehensive care, human and social rights, in broad, multi-scale and
inter-sectorial interactions, with the constitution of a systemic, regionalized
innovation. Of prime importance is the capacity to devise which general
principles are responsible for maintaining the unity(mode of care), seeking to
outline the coherence of the different provision models that the system might
develop according to the social needs in regional settings. Without that, users
will continue to seek and create ways of accessing health services that challenge
the rationale of those very services. Hospital reform is also required to
integrate and reorient the hospital networks. These reflections are important for
the SUS to uphold its solidarity project, expressed in the trinity of
universality-comprehensiveness-equality.

Publisher: O artigo teve como objetivo refletir sobre os desafios da construção
das Regiões e Redes de Saúde no Brasil. São elencados como desafios centrais para
a constituição das Regiões e Redes de Saúde: o Modelo de Atenção, a Atenção
Primária à Saúde, o Cuidado aos Usuários com Doenças Crônicas e a Assistência
Hospitalar. Para a consolidação das Regiões e Redes é necessária a incorporação
de um sentido ético da organização: a centralidade nas necessidades sociais,
populacionais e individuais, derivadas da integralidade, dos direitos humanos e
sociais, em amplas interações multiescalares e intersetoriais; com a constituição
de uma inovação sistêmica regionalizada. É central a capacidade de divisar quais 
são os princípios gerais responsáveis por manter a unidade (o modo de atenção),
buscando balizar a coerência dos diferentes modelos de provisão que o sistema
pode desenvolver segundo as necessidades sociais em contextos regionais. Sem
isso, os usuários continuarão a buscar e a criar maneiras de acessar os serviços 
de saúde que desafiam a racionalidade dos próprios serviços. É também necessária 
uma reforma hospitalar que integre e reoriente as redes. Essas ponderações são
importantes para que o SUS mantenha seu projeto de solidariedade, expresso na
tríade da universalidade-integralidade-equidade.
DOI: 10.1590/1413-81232018236.05502018 
PMID: 29972487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Adv Clin Exp Med. 2018 Oct;27(10):1425-1430. doi: 10.17219/acem/73802.

Evaluation of factors affecting the sense of coherence in women during pregnancy:
A prospective pilot study.

Przestrzelska MA(1), Knihinicka-Mercik Z(1), Gryboś A(1), Ptaszkowski K(2),
Bartnicki J(1)(3), Zalewski J(1).

Author information: 
(1)1st Department and Clinic of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Wroclaw Medical University, Poland.
(2)Department of Clinical Biomechanics and Physiotherapy in Motor System
Disorders, Faculty of Health Sciences, Wroclaw Medical University, Poland.
(3)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Hospital Märkisch-Oderland GmbH,
Strausberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Pregnancy is a special time in the life of a woman, which induces
many changes not only in the biological, but also in the biopsychosocial
dimension.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of the study was to evaluate the factors affecting the sense 
of coherence (SOC) among women during pregnancy. It was hypothesized that a high 
SOC will depend on a high level of received support, lack of the risk of mental
disorders in the perinatal period and physiological course of pregnancy.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Factographic material was collected by a diagnostic survey 
method. As a 1st research tool, the Polish adaptation of the Sense of Coherence -
Orientation to Life Questionnaire (SOC-29) was used. Another research tool was
the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS), used here for pregnant women and
therefore called Edinburgh Depression Scale (EDS).
RESULTS: We analyzed the data of all 200 women with physiological pregnancies and
200 women with complicated pregnancies from whom a complete valid responses were 
obtained. All women were aged between 18 and 36 years. Significant predictors of 
low SOC results in the model were: age (odd ratio [OR] = 0.929, 95% confidence
interval [CI] 0.870-0.992, p = 0.0280), being multipara (OR = 1.996, 95% CI
1.271-3.135, p = 0.0027), having never/occasionally husband/partner support (OR =
1.978, 95% CI 1.070-3.656, p = 0.0295), and EDS results (OR = 1.312, 95% CI
1.169-1.472, p = 0.0000).
CONCLUSIONS: Predisposing factors for the occurrence of a low rate of SOC in
pregnant women are: lower age, multiparity, lack of social support, especially
from the husband/partner, and the risk of depression during pregnancy. This may
result from the fact that a strong SOC develops in the process of socialization, 
and with age we acquire the ability to accurately assess reality.

DOI: 10.17219/acem/73802 
PMID: 29971972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Psychiatr Prax. 2018 Jul;45(S 01):S21-S25. doi: 10.1055/s-0044-100965. Epub 2018 
Jul 3.

[Misfortune with Health - Fortune in Illness].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Leidinger F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Facharzt für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie/Geriatrie, Health Care Management,
c/o Gemeinschaftspraxis für Psychiatrie, Psychotherapie und Psychosomatik.

Health and illness in modern societies are often understood as moral or normative
categories. The author proposes an anthropological, not mutually excluding
concept. A case study shows that even a severe illness with shortened
life-expectation and -quality can provide new possibilities and confer fulfilment
and happiness for the people affected on condition that they and their caregivers
have an open-minded attitude ("serendipity"), sense of coherence, empowerment and
orientation towards "recovery" as a new concept of healthiness at their disposal.
The challenges for mental health services are being discussed.

Publisher: Ausgehend von ihrer Begriffsgeschichte werden Gesundheit und Krankheit
als unterschiedliche Formen menschlicher Existenz beschrieben, die sich nicht
gegenseitig verneinen. Eine Kasuistik zeigt, dass auch von einer schweren
Erkrankung mit eingeschränkter Lebensqualität und -zeit Betroffene Glück und
Erfüllung erleben können. Als Voraussetzungen hierfür werden eine offene
Suchhaltung („Serendipity“), Kohärenz, Empowerment und ein an den Erfahrungen der
Selbsthilfe orientiertes Behandlungsziel („Recovery“) beschrieben. Die
Herausforderungen für das psychiatrische Hilfesystem werden diskutiert.
© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0044-100965 
PMID: 29969815  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Der Autor gibt an, dass kein Interessenkonflikt
besteht.


312. J Pediatr. 2018 Sep;200:64-70.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.05.025. Epub 2018 Jun
27.

Resilience Rather than Medical Factors: How Parents Predict Quality of Life of
Their Sick Newborn.

Ferrand A(1), Gorgos A(2), Ali N(3), Payot A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, CHU Sainte-Justine,
University of Montreal, Montreal, Québec, Canada.
(2)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, McGill University Health
Center, McGill University, Montreal, Québec, Canada.
(3)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, Hôpital
Maisonneuve-Rosemont, University of Montreal, Montreal, Québec, Canada.
(4)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, CHU Sainte-Justine,
University of Montreal, Montreal, Québec, Canada; Clinical Ethics Unit, CHU
Sainte-Justine, University of Montreal, Montreal, Québec, Canada; CHU
Sainte-Justine Research Center, Department of Pediatrics, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Québec, Canada; Palliative Care Unit, CHU Sainte-Justine, Montreal,
Québec, Canada. Electronic address: antoine.payot@umontreal.ca.

Comment in
    J Pediatr. 2018 Sep;200:1-2.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the influence of resiliency and stress on parental
perspectives of the future quality of life (QOL) of neonatal intensive care unit 
(NICU) newborns at high risk of neurodevelopmental disability.
STUDY DESIGN: We conducted a prospective multicenter questionnaire study.
Perspectives from parents of newborns at high risk of disability as per neonatal 
follow-up criteria were compared with a low-risk group consisting of parents of
all other NICU newborns. Parental anxiety and resiliency, measured using Brief
Symptom Inventory and Sense of Coherence scales, respectively, were associated
with QOL projections.
RESULTS: Parents returned 129 (81%) questionnaires. Parents considering their
newborn as currently sicker were more stressed (P = .011) and worried about
future physical (P < .001) and mental (P < .001) health, QOL (P < .001), coping
(P = .019), and financial (P < .001) and emotional (P = .002) impact on the
family. Ooverall, there was no difference between parents of high-risk and
low-risk newborns on QOL projections. Almost all parents projected a good future 
QOL. Less resilient parents projected more pain (P = .04), more financial
(P = .019), and emotional (P = .031) impact on their family, and were 10 times
more likely to predict that their newborn would remain chronically ill.
CONCLUSIONS: Parental projection of future QOL of NICU newborns is not associated
with risk of disability. Most parents predict overall a good future QOL and focus
more on familial impact. The Sense of Coherence scale may be used in clinical
settings to identify less resilient parents.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.05.025 
PMID: 29958673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Top Cogn Sci. 2019 Oct;11(4):710-732. doi: 10.1111/tops.12358. Epub 2018 Jun 28.

Storytelling as Adaptive Collective Sensemaking.

Bietti LM(1), Tilston O(1), Bangerter A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Work and Organizational Psychology, University of Neuchâtel.

Comment in
    Top Cogn Sci. 2019 Oct;11(4):821-824.

Storytelling represents a key element in the creation and propagation of culture.
Three main accounts of the adaptive function of storytelling include (a)
manipulating the behavior of the audience to enhance the fitness of the narrator,
(b) transmitting survival-relevant information while avoiding the costs involved 
in the first-hand acquisition of that information, and (c) maintaining social
bonds or group-level cooperation. We assess the substantial evidence collected in
experimental and ethnographic studies for each account. These accounts do not
always appeal to the specific features of storytelling above and beyond language 
use in general. We propose that the specific adaptive value of storytelling lies 
in making sense of non-routine, uncertain, or novel situations, thereby enabling 
the collaborative development of previously acquired skills and knowledge, but
also promoting social cohesion by strengthening intragroup identity and
clarifying intergroup relations.

© 2018 The Authors. Topics in Cognitive Science published by Wiley Periodicals,
Inc. on behalf of Cognitive Science Society.

DOI: 10.1111/tops.12358 
PMCID: PMC7379714
PMID: 29954043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2018 Dec;17(8):672-674. doi: 10.1177/1474515118787416.
Epub 2018 Jun 27.

Why some people do well and others don't. The role of sense of coherence in
disease adaptation.

Moons P(1)(2)(3), Norekval TM(4)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)1 KU Leuven Department of Public Health, KU Leuven - University of Leuven,
Belgium.
(2)2 Institute of Health and Care Sciences, University of Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)3 Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Cape Town, South
Africa.
(4)4 Department of Heart Disease, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(5)5 Department of Clinical Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Bergen,
Norway.
(6)6 Faculty of Health and Social Sciences, Western Norway University of Applied 
Sciences, Bergen, Norway.

DOI: 10.1177/1474515118787416 
PMID: 29947556 


315. Cancer Nurs. 2019 Sep/Oct;42(5):345-354. doi: 10.1097/NCC.0000000000000617.

From Challenges to Resources: A Qualitative Study of Cancer Coordinators'
Experiences of Barriers and Facilitators to Enacting Their System-Focused Tasks.

Lie NK(1), Solvang PK, Hauken MA.

Author information: 
(1)Author Affiliations: Department of Physiotherapy, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
OsloMet - Oslo Metropolitan University, Oslo (Ms Lie and Dr Solvang); and Center 
for Crisis Psychology, University of Bergen, Bergen (Dr Hauken), Norway.

BACKGROUND: Cancer coordinators (CCs) operate at both patient and system levels
in order to provide patients with tailored and coordinated services. In common
with international CCs, Norwegian CCs denote notable progress in their
patient-focused work, while reporting ongoing challenges in carrying out
system-focused tasks. However, little is known about the barriers and
facilitators for CCs' system-level work.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to explore Norwegian CCs' experiences of
barriers and facilitators for enacting system-focused tasks.
METHODS: The study applies a qualitative method, conducting an interpretative
data inquiry of semistructured in-depth interviews with 26 Norwegian CCs. The
data were analyzed using thematic analysis and discussed in light of previous
research and salutogenic theory.
RESULTS: The analyses revealed 3 main themes: (1) "understanding the role and
local cancer care," (2) "systems for care delivery in primary healthcare," and
(3) "commitment to collaboration." Where present, the themes could represent
important facilitators, whereas their absence could depict notable challenges to 
CCs system-focused work. Over time, as CCs were able to mobilize resources, they 
were able to gradually turn initial challenges into facilitators in the context
of system-level work.
CONCLUSIONS: Cancer coordinators encounter cognitive, practical, and relational
topics that impact their system-focused activities. Adopting a salutogenic focus 
can help CCs mobilize resources needed to turn challenges into facilitators for
system-level work.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: Cancer care coordination cannot be undertaken by CCs
alone. Cancer coordinators' embedding in multidisciplinary teams, common systems 
for care provision, meaningful work relations, and professionals' commitment to
cancer care represent important facilitators for CCs' system-focused tasks.

DOI: 10.1097/NCC.0000000000000617 
PMID: 29933310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Int J Paediatr Dent. 2018 Jun 21. doi: 10.1111/ipd.12375. [Epub ahead of print]

Protective psychosocial factors and dental caries in children and adolescents: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

da Silva AN(1), Alvares de Lima ST(2), Vettore MV(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Society, Institute of Community Health, Fluminense
Federal University, Niterói, Brazil.
(2)Núcleo Avançado de Odontologia, Centro Universitário UniRedentor, Juiz de
Fora, Brazil.
(3)Unit Oral Health, Dentistry and Society, School of Clinical Dentistry,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.

BACKGROUND: Psychosocial protective factors include dispositional and family
attributes that may reduce the occurrence of dental caries.
AIM: This review analysed the evidence on the relationship between protective
psychosocial factors and dental caries in children and adolescents.
DESIGN: Primary studies involving children and adolescents were searched in the
following electronic databases: Medline, SCOPUS, LILACS, SciELO, and Web of
Science. The reference lists were also screened. Protective psychosocial factor
descriptors were in accordance with the salutogenic theory. The outcome was
clinical measure of dental caries. Quality assessments were performed using the
Newcastle-Ottawa scale.
RESULTS: The final search resulted in 35 studies, including 7 cohort, one
case-control, and 27 cross-sectional studies. Most studies were of moderate
quality. Meta-analyses revealed that low parental internal locus of control
(cohort studies: OR = 1.42, 95% CI: 1.20-1.64; cross-sectional studies:
OR = 1.30, 95% CI: 1.19-1.41), high parental external chance (OR = 1.20, 95% CI: 
1.10-1.29), and high maternal sense of coherence (OR = 0.77, 95% CI: 0.62-0.93)
were associated with dental caries in children. High social support (OR = 0.81,
95% CI: 0.68-0.93) and greater self-efficacy (OR = 1.50, 95% CI: 1.12-1.22) were 
also associated with dental caries in adolescents.
CONCLUSIONS: The current evidence suggests that some salutogenic factors are
important protective factors of dental caries during childhood and adolescence.

© 2018 BSPD, IAPD and John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ipd.12375 
PMID: 29926978 


317. Eur Endocrinol. 2018 Apr;14(1):15-16. doi: 10.17925/EE.2018.14.1.15. Epub 2018
Apr 18.

A LEMON a Day Keeps Fatigue Away - The ABCDE of Fatigue.

Kalra S(1), Sahay R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Bharti Hospital, Karnal, India.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Osmania Medical College, Hyderabad, India.

Fatigue is a common symptom in clinical medicine. The complex and multifaceted
etiopathogenesis of fatigue is a challenge for the differential diagnosis and
management of fatigue. This brief communication shares two simple mnemonics -
LEMON and ABCDE - which help in the evaluation of fatigue. These frameworks are
as relevant to endocrinology and diabetes as to general practice. The mnemonic
LEMON stands for lifestyle, endocrine, medical/metabolic, observer (physician)
and nutrition-related factors which may cause fatigue; ABCDE lists the aetiology 
of fatigue in three columns related to physiological/nutritional, psychosocial
and biomedical causes (each column includes one cause and how this relates to the
ABCDE rubric).

DOI: 10.17925/EE.2018.14.1.15 
PMCID: PMC5954589
PMID: 29922346 

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Sanjay Kalra and Rakesh Sahay have
nothing to declare in relation to this article.


318. Isr J Psychiatry Relat Sci. 2018;55(1):66-71.

The Relationship between Disordered Eating Pathology, Sense of Coherence and Body
Image among Adolescent Boys in Israel.

Latzer Y(1), Tzischinsky O(2), Spivak-Lavi Z(3), Chen I(2), Weinberger-Litman
S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Eating Disorders Institution, Psychiatric Division, Rambam Health Care Campus,
Haifa, Israel School of Social Work, Faculty of Social Welfare and Health
Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
(2)Department of Psychology, Emek Yezreel College, Emek Yezreel, Israel.
(3)School of Social Work, Faculty of Social Welfare and Health Sciences,
University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
(4)Dept. of Psychology, Marymount Manhattan College, New York, N.Y., U.S.A.

BACKGROUND: Disordered eating pathology (DEP) and body dissatisfaction are
well-documented risk factors for eating disorders and have become more prevalent 
among adolescent males.
METHOD: The sample consisted of 256 Israeli boys, in grades 8-12. Participants
completed questionnaires measuring, Sense of Coherence (SOC), Body Shape (BSQ),
Eating attitudes (EAT-26), and the Eating Disorder Inventory (EDI-2).
RESULTS: Findings revealed low levels of DEP among adolescent boys. Younger
adolescents (grade 8-9) had higher levels of clinically relevant DEP than older
adolescents (grade 10-12). SOC was negatively associated with DEP and a
significant interaction for age and SOC emerged with younger age being associated
with both lower levels of SOC and higher DEP.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate a low overall prevalence rate of DEP among 
adolescent boys and is consistent with the developmental literature relating to
SOC and mental health and in contrast with a similar population of girls
documented in Israel and the US.


PMID: 29916408  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12690. doi: 10.1111/desc.12690. Epub 2018 Jun 17.

Longitudinal development of attention and inhibitory control during the first
year of life.

Holmboe K(1), Bonneville-Roussy A(2), Csibra G(3)(4), Johnson MH(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)School of Education, Froebel College, University of Roehampton, London, UK.
(3)Cognitive Development Centre, Department of Cognitive Science, Central
European University, Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Department of Psychological
Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, London , UK.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Executive functions (EFs) are key abilities that allow us to control our thoughts
and actions. Research suggests that two EFs, inhibitory control (IC) and working 
memory (WM), emerge around 9 months. Little is known about IC earlier in infancy 
and whether basic attentional processes form the "building blocks" of emerging
IC. These questions were investigated longitudinally in 104 infants tested
behaviorally on two screen-based attention tasks at 4 months, and on IC tasks at 
6 and 9 months. Results provided no evidence that basic attention formed
precursors for IC. However, there was full support for coherence in IC at 9
months and partial support for stability in IC from 6 months. This suggests that 
IC emerges earlier than previously assumed. A video abstract of this article can 
be viewed at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rVE17hooANY.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12690 
PMID: 29911347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Front Psychol. 2018 May 22;9:785. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00785. eCollection
2018.

A Non-randomized Controlled Trial of EMDR on Affective Symptoms in Patients With 
Glioblastoma Multiforme.

Szpringer M(1), Oledzka M(1), Amann BL(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Jan Kochanowski University, Kielce,
Poland.
(2)Institut de Neuropsiquiatria i Addiccions, Hospital del Mar, Centro Fórum
Research Unit, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental,
Barcelona, Spain.
(3)IMIM (Institut Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions Mèdiques), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a highly aggressive brain cancer and its
survival after diagnosis is less than 2 years. Therefore, GBM patients are
especially prone to co-occurring psychological conditions such as anxiety and
depressive disorders. Furthermore, aggressive medical therapies affect patients' 
lives, undermining their sense of meaning and coherence. The main aim of this
study was to determine the effectiveness of Eye Movement Desensitization and
Reprocessing (EMDR) therapy on anxiety, depression and sense of coherence in
patients with GBM. Thirty-seven GBM-diagnosed women were included in this trial
and received standard medical care. Of those, 18 patients were treated during 4
months with 10-12 individual EMDR sessions (60-90 minutes each). Nineteen GBM
patients were used as a non-randomized control group as they consented to
psychological evaluations but not to a psychotherapeutic intervention. The groups
were homogeneous in terms of gender, age, educational level and treatment, but
not in anxiety and depressive levels at baseline. All patients were evaluated at 
baseline, after treatment (4 months) and at follow-up (further 4 months) by the
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS-M) and the Sense of Coherence Scale
(SOC-29). Caregivers in both groups were interviewed by the Patient Caregiver
Questionnaire after 4 months follow-up. Statistical analyses were conducted using
ANOVA statistics, correlation and regression analysis. Results showed a
statistically significant decrease in the EMDR group in anxiety, depression and
anger, when compared to the experimental group. EMDR therapy also had a positive 
impact upon the sense of coherence level in the experimental group, whereas in
the control group this declined. Finally, the caregivers reported beneficial
outcomes of the EMDR therapy with less anxiety- and anger-related behaviors in
patients in the experimental group compared to the control group. This study is
the first to show beneficial effects of EMDR therapy in alleviating affective
symptoms and improving coherence in a severe medically ill population with GBM.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00785 
PMCID: PMC5985688
PMID: 29892240 


321. J Relig Health. 2019 Aug;58(4):1115-1124. doi: 10.1007/s10943-018-0646-7.

Religion, Culture and Meaning-Making Coping: A Study Among Cancer Patients in
Turkey.

Ahmadi F(1), Erbil P(2), Ahmadi N(3), Cetrez ÖA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social Work and Psychology, Faculty of Health and Occupational
Studies, University of Gävle, 801 76, Gävle, Sweden. faw@hig.se.
(2)Clinic of Humanite Psychiatry, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Department of Social Work and Psychology, Faculty of Health and Occupational
Studies, University of Gävle, 801 76, Gävle, Sweden.
(4)Faculty of Theology, Uppsala University, Box 511, 751 20, Uppsala, Sweden.

The present paper looks at the influence of culture on Turkish cancer patients'
use of meaning-making coping, paying particular attention to religious,
spiritual, and existential coping methods. Data were collected using an interview
study (n = 25, 18 women, age range 20-71). Individuals were recruited at an
oncology center and a psychiatry clinic in Istanbul. The main focus of the study 
has been on existential meaning-making coping, which is characterized by finding 
power inside oneself, altruism, family love, a search for meaning by
contemplating philosophical issues, and having a positive life perspective
(shukran-thankfulness). In contrast to findings from similar studies conducted in
other countries (studies included in the same project), in Turkey religious
belief directly determines the coping methods used, including the non-religious
methods.

DOI: 10.1007/s10943-018-0646-7 
PMCID: PMC6606655
PMID: 29872943  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2018 Sep;256(9):1789-1790. doi:
10.1007/s00417-018-4028-3. Epub 2018 Jun 2.

SD-OCT in NIR modality to diagnose retinal microvascular abnormalities in
neurofibromatosis type 1.

Moramarco A(1), Giustini S(2), Miraglia E(2), Sacchetti M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale del Policlinico
155, 00161, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Sapienza University of Rome,
Policlinico Umberto I, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale del Policlinico
155, 00161, Rome, Italy. marta.sacchetti@uniroma1.it.

DOI: 10.1007/s00417-018-4028-3 
PMID: 29860546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


323. BMC Public Health. 2018 May 30;18(1):672. doi: 10.1186/s12889-018-5580-9.

Factors related to work ability and well-being among women on sick leave due to
long-term pain in the neck/shoulders and/or back: a cross-sectional study.

Rashid M(1), Kristofferzon ML(2)(3), Heiden M(4), Nilsson A(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Musculoskeletal Research, Department of Occupational and Public
Health Sciences, Faculty of Health and Occupational Studies, University of Gävle,
SE-80176, Gävle, Sweden. mamunur.rashid@hig.se.
(2)Department of Health and Caring Sciences, Faculty of Health and Occupational
Studies, University of Gävle, Gävle, Sweden.
(3)Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Centre for Musculoskeletal Research, Department of Occupational and Public
Health Sciences, Faculty of Health and Occupational Studies, University of Gävle,
SE-80176, Gävle, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Musculoskeletal pain is one of the leading causes of sick leave,
especially among women, in Western countries. The aim of the present study was to
identify factors associated with work ability and well-being, respectively, among
women on sick leave due to long-term pain in the neck/shoulders and/or back.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study with a correlational design was conducted on
women who were sick-listed due to long-term pain in the neck/shoulders and/or
back. A total of 208 participants responded to a survey comprising eight
instruments: Multidimensional Pain Inventory scale, General Self-Efficacy scale, 
Sense of Coherence scale, Coping Strategies Questionnaire, Demand-Control-Support
Questionnaire, Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, Work Ability Index and Life
Satisfaction questionnaire. Multiple linear regression analyses were performed to
identify factors associated with work ability and well-being, respectively.
RESULTS: Women who more strongly believed they would return to the same work had 
greater work ability (β = 0.39, p < 0.001), whereas women with higher pain
intensity (β = - 0.30, p < 0.001) and higher job strain (β = - 0.12, p < 0.05)
had lower work ability. Women with higher self-efficacy rated greater well-being 
(β = 0.14, p < 0.05). As the women's scores for depression increased, their
well-being decreased by 48%, which was statistically significant (p < 0.001). The
regression models for work ability and well-being were significant (p < 0.001),
and their adjusted R- square values were 48% and 59%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The study suggests that the factors beliefs to be back at the same
work, pain intensity and job strain are predictive of work ability. Moreover, the
factors self-efficacy and depression seem to be predictive of well-being. The
findings highlight factors that should be considered by health care professionals
and policy-makers to guide attempts to reduce sick leave.

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-018-5580-9 
PMCID: PMC5977487
PMID: 29848306  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2018 May 28;15(6). pii: E1096. doi:
10.3390/ijerph15061096.

Obstacles and Future Prospects: Considerations on Health Promotion Activities for
Older Workers in Europe.

Magnavita N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Public Health, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, 00168 Roma, 
Italy. nicolamagnavita@gmail.com.

The ageing of workers is one of the most important issues for occupational health
and safety in Europe. The ageing of the active population means that health
promotion is a necessity rather than a mere option. This review considers
barriers and perspectives for workplace health promotion for older workers. Lack 
of awareness on the part of management and inflexibility in the occupational
health and safety system appear to be major barriers. To overcome these, it will 
be necessary to disseminate knowledge regarding the effectiveness of health
promotion actions for older workers, encourage greater involvement on the part of
social partners, recover resources by replacing medical consumerism and
bureaucratic practices, adopt an integrated approach combining the prevention of 
occupational risks and the promotion of healthy lifestyles, and recognize
subsidiarity and the ability of working communities to regulate themselves.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph15061096 
PMCID: PMC6025276
PMID: 29843423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Work. 2018;60(1):85-94. doi: 10.3233/WOR-182721.

Workplace relationships impact self-rated health: A survey of Swedish municipal
health care employees.

Persson SS(1)(2), Lindström PN(1), Pettersson P(1), Andersson I(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health and Society, Kristianstad University, Kristianstad, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The impact of positive social relationships on the health of
municipal employees in the elder care sector in Sweden needs further examination.
OBJECTIVE: To explore the association between health and relationships among
elderly care employees using a salutogenic perspective.
METHOD: Survey of all employees (n = 997) in special housing, home care and
Disabled Support and Services in a Swedish municipality. The questionnaire, which
had a salutogenic perspective, included information on self-rated health from the
previously validated SHIS (Salutogenic Health Indicator Scale), psychosocial work
environment and experiences, social climate, and health-promoting workplace
relationships.
RESULTS: The response rate was 69% . Results of a multivariable linear regression
model showed four significant predictors of health: general work experiences,
colleague belongingness and positive relationships with managers and care
recipients. In another model, colleague belongingness was significantly related
to satisfaction with care recipients, work, length of employment as well as
general work experiences and relationships with managers.
CONCLUSION: Strengthening of positive work relationships, not only between
workmates but also with managers and care recipients, seems to be an essential
area for employee health promotion. Colleague belongingness may be deepened by
development of a positive work climate, including satisfactory work experiences, 
positive manager relationships and a stable work force.

DOI: 10.3233/WOR-182721 
PMID: 29843296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Bioeth Inq. 2018 Sep;15(3):319-325. doi: 10.1007/s11673-018-9858-5. Epub 2018
May 25.

Parental Moral Distress and Moral Schism in the Neonatal ICU.

Foe G(1), Hellmann J(1)(2), Greenberg RA(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Bioethics Department, The Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue,
Toronto, ON, M5G 1X8, Canada.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(3)Bioethics Department, The Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue,
Toronto, ON, M5G 1X8, Canada. rebecca.greenberg@sickkids.ca.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
rebecca.greenberg@sickkids.ca.

Ethical dilemmas in critical care may cause healthcare practitioners to
experience moral distress: incoherence between what one believes to be best and
what occurs. Given that paediatric decision-making typically involves parents, we
propose that parents can also experience moral distress when faced with making
value-laden decisions in the neonatal intensive care unit. We propose a new
concept-that parents may experience "moral schism"-a genuine uncertainty
regarding a value-based decision that is accompanied by emotional distress.
Schism, unlike moral distress, is not caused by barriers to making and executing 
a decision that is deemed to be best by the decision-makers but rather an
encounter of significant internal struggle. We explore factors that appear to
contribute to both moral distress and "moral schism" for parents: the degree of
available support, a sense of coherence of the situation, and a sense of
responsibility. We propose that moral schism is an underappreciated concept that 
needs to be explicated and may be more prevalent than moral distress when
exploring decision-making experiences for parents. We also suggest actions of
healthcare providers that may help minimize parental "moral schism" and moral
distress.

DOI: 10.1007/s11673-018-9858-5 
PMID: 29802588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Health Promot Int. 2019 Aug 1;34(4):859-868. doi: 10.1093/heapro/day027.

Picturing academic learning: salutogenic and health promoting perspectives on
drawings.

Garista P(1)(2), Pocetta G(1), Lindström B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Centre for Health Promotion and Education, University of Perugia,
Perugia, Italy.
(2)National Institute of Documentation, Innovation and Educational Research,
Nucleo territoriale Centro, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Public Health and Nursing Science, Norwegian University of
Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.

More than 20 years ago an article about the use of drawings in higher education
appeared in a medical journal. After that, other papers explored the possible
contribution of drawings in adult education, while only very few in the field of 
health promotion and education. This article aims to introduce the use of drawing
in this field using the salutogenic lens to think, plan and reflect on academic
learning. Reflections on what salutogenesis is and what we can consider a clear
application of salutogenic principles to the learning process answer a
hypothetical question for the reader concerning the relationship between drawings
and health promotion theories. They appear as communication tools capable of
exploring meaning-making processes, capturing data that is flexible to dynamic
systems, power relations, as well as emotional and latent aspects of human
experience. This article proposes a connection between salutogenesis and drawings
through: a theoretical framework on salutogenic learning and drawings; a teacher 
practice and its tools focusing the critical point on visual data analysis in a
learning environment; a learner case example for knowledge and capacity building 
through the drawing process; and a health promotion competency-based analysis.
Our case example illustrates how drawings were introduced in a post-graduate
course in Health Promotion and Education and argues their strengths and
weaknesses.

© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/day027 
PMID: 29800300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Eur Eat Disord Rev. 2018 Sep;26(5):499-507. doi: 10.1002/erv.2605. Epub 2018 May 
24.

Differences in set-shifting and central coherence across anorexia nervosa
subtypes in children and adolescents.

Herbrich L(1), Kappel V(1), van Noort BM(1), Winter S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health,
Department for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatic Medicine and
Psychotherapy, Berlin, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Regarding executive functioning in anorexia nervosa (AN), little is
known about differences between the restricting (AN-R) and binge eating/purging
(AN-BP) subtypes. Especially for adolescents, there is sparse data. Hence, the
current aim is to investigate differences in set-shifting, central coherence, and
self-reported executive functioning across adolescent AN subtypes.
METHODS: Ninety AN-R, 21 AN-BP, and 63 controls completed an extensive assessment
battery including neuropsychological tests for executive functioning and the
self-report questionnaire Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Functioning.
RESULTS: Patients with AN-R and AN-BP did not differ on neuropsychological
measures, and both performed similarly to controls. Behavior Rating Inventory of 
Executive Functioning scores fell within the normal range with AN subtypes
showing mostly comparable ratings. AN-BP patients scored higher on 2 composite
indices and the "shift" subscale compared with AN-R.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest similar cognitive functioning in adolescent AN
subtypes as well as healthy controls. However, more research is needed to draw
more general conclusions.

Copyright © 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and Eating Disorders Association.

DOI: 10.1002/erv.2605 
PMID: 29797742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2018 May 24;10(1):47. doi: 10.1186/s13195-018-0381-z.

Meaning in life: resilience beyond reserve.

Bartrés-Faz D(1)(2)(3), Cattaneo G(4)(5), Solana J(5)(6)(7), Tormos JM(5)(6)(7), 
Pascual-Leone A(5)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Medicina, Facultat de Medicina i Ciències de la Salut i
Institut de Neurociències, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
dbartres@ub.edu.
(2)Institut d'Investigacions Biomediques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona,
Spain. dbartres@ub.edu.
(3)Institut Guttmann, Institut Universitari de Neurorehabilitació adscrit a la
UAB, Badalona, Spain. dbartres@ub.edu.
(4)Institut d'Investigacions Biomediques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona,
Spain.
(5)Institut Guttmann, Institut Universitari de Neurorehabilitació adscrit a la
UAB, Badalona, Spain.
(6)Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain.
(7)Fundació Institut d'Investigació en Ciències de la Salut Germans Trias i
Pujol, Badalona, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Berenson-Allen Center for Noninvasive Brain Stimulation, Division of Cognitive
Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The contribution of psychological factors to brain health and
resilience remains poorly investigated. Furthermore, their possible interaction
with 'classical' cognitive reserve (CR) estimates in predicting perceived mental 
health and cognitive status has not been specifically addressed.
METHODS: We obtained data from 1081 adults responding to questionnaires on the
three meaning in life (MiL) dimensions: purpose in life (PiL), sense of coherence
(SoC), and engagement with life (EwL). A questionnaire on CR variables was also
administered. The outcome measures were self-reported cognitive function and
affective status (depression, stress, and anxiety). Multiple linear regression
analyses were used to evaluate the association between sociodemographic
variables, MiL dimensions, and CR with the two selected outcomes. Mediation
analyses, adjusted for age and gender, were applied to determine whether the MiL 
dimensions mediated the putative effects of CR on self-reported mental and
cognitive health.
RESULTS: All three MiL components, but not CR estimates, correlated with the
self-reported affective status of the participants. Higher CR, PiL, and SoC (but 
not EwL) scores significantly correlated with higher perceived cognitive
function. Notably, the observed association between the CR measures and
self-reported cognitive function was mediated by PiL and SoC.
CONCLUSIONS: Psychological MiL dimensions mediate the association between classic
CR estimates and self-perceived cognitive function. Further studies on CR could
consider including formal measures of such psychological factors to better
understand their unique or synergistic contributions, as well as investigate the 
associated mechanisms maintaining brain function at older ages.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-018-0381-z 
PMCID: PMC5968537
PMID: 29793549  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


330. BMC Health Serv Res. 2018 May 24;18(1):376. doi: 10.1186/s12913-018-3129-3.

Exploring the potential of a multi-level approach to improve capability for
continuous organizational improvement and learning in a Swedish healthcare
region.

Nyström ME(1)(2), Höög E(3)(4), Garvare R(5), Andersson Bäck M(6), Terris DD(7), 
Hansson J(3)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics, Medical Management
Centre, Karolinska Institutet, SE 171 77, Stockholm, Sweden.
monica.nystrom@ki.se.
(2)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Epidemiology and Global
Health, Umeå University, SE 901 87, Umeå, Sweden. monica.nystrom@ki.se.
(3)Department of Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics, Medical Management
Centre, Karolinska Institutet, SE 171 77, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Epidemiology and Global
Health, Umeå University, SE 901 87, Umeå, Sweden.
(5)Department of Business Administration, Technology and Social Sciences, Luleå
University of Technology, SE 971 87, Luleå, Sweden.
(6)Department of Social work, Gothenburg University, Box 100, SE 405 30,
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(7)Center for Family Research, University of Georgia, 1095 College Station Rd,
Athens, GA, 30602, USA.
(8)Department of Public Health Analysis and Data Management, Public Health Agency
of Sweden, SE 171 82, Solna, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Eldercare and care of people with functional impairments is organized
by the municipalities in Sweden. Improving care in these areas is complex, with
multiple stakeholders and organizations. Appropriate strategies to develop
capability for continuing organizational improvement and learning (COIL) are
needed. The purpose of our study was to develop and pilot-test a flexible,
multilevel approach for COIL capability building and to identify what it takes to
achieve changes in key actors' approaches to COIL. The approach, named
"Sustainable Improvement and Development through Strategic and Systematic
Approaches" (SIDSSA), was applied through an action-research and action-learning 
intervention.
METHODS: The SIDSSA approach was tested in a regional research and development
(R&D) unit, and in two municipalities handling care of the elderly and people
with functional impairments. Our approach included a multilevel strategy,
development loops of five flexible phases, and an action-learning loop. The
approach was designed to support systems understanding, strategic focus,
methodological practices, and change process knowledge - all of which required
double-loop learning. Multiple qualitative methods, i.e., repeated interviews,
process diaries, and documents, provided data for conventional content analyses.
RESULTS: The new approach was successfully tested on all cases and adopted and
sustained by the R&D unit. Participants reported new insights and skills. The
development loop facilitated a sense of coherence and control during uncertainty,
improved planning and problem analysis, enhanced mapping of context and
conditions, and supported problem-solving at both the individual and unit levels.
The systems-level view and structured approach helped participants to explain,
motivate, and implement change initiatives, especially after working more
systematically with mapping, analyses, and goal setting.
CONCLUSIONS: An easily understood and generalizable model internalized by key
organizational actors is an important step before more complex development models
can be implemented. SIDSSA facilitated individual and group learning through
action-learning and supported systems-level views and structured approaches
across multiple organizational levels. Active involvement of diverse
organizational functions and levels in the learning process was facilitated.
However, the time frame was too short to fully test all aspects of the approach, 
specifically in reaching beyond the involved managers to front-line staff and
patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-018-3129-3 
PMCID: PMC5968489
PMID: 29793473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


331. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2018 May 22;19(1):159. doi: 10.1186/s12891-018-2058-y.

Psychosocial predictors for outcome after total joint arthroplasty: a prospective
comparison of hip and knee arthroplasty.

Lindner M(1), Nosseir O(2), Keller-Pliessnig A(3), Teigelack P(3), Teufel M(3),
Tagay S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Virchowstraße 174, 45147, Essen, Germany. marion.lindner@lvr.de.
(2)Department of General, Orthopedic and Accident Surgery, Sankt Josef-Hospital
GmbH, In der Hees 4, 46509, Xanten, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Virchowstraße 174, 45147, Essen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: As findings regarding predictors for good outcome after total joint
arthroplasty are highly inconsistent, aim of this study was to investigate the
influence of the psychosocial variables sense of coherence and social support as 
well as mental distress on physical outcome after surgery. It should be
investigated if different predictors are important in patients after total hip
arthroplasty (THA) compared to patients after total knee arthroplasty (TKA).
METHODS: In a prospective design, 44 patients undergoing THA and 61 patients
undergoing TKA were examined presurgery and 6 and 12 weeks after surgery using
WOMAC (disease-specific outcome), SF-36 (health-related quality of life), BSI
(psychological distress), SOC-13 (sense of coherence), and F-SozU (social
support). Changes over time were calculated by analyses of variance with repeated
measures. Stepwise multiple linear regression analyses were computed for each
group to predict scores of WOMAC total and all WOMAC subscales 12 weeks
postoperatively.
RESULTS: THA as well as TKA patients experienced improvements in all parameters
(effect sizes for WOMAC scores between η2 = .387 and η2 = .631) with THA patients
showing even better results than TKA patients. WOMAC scores 12 weeks after
surgery were predicted predominantly by WOMAC baseline scores in TKA with an
amount of explained variance between 9.6 and 19.5%. In THA, 12-weeks WOMAC scores
were predicted by baseline measures of psychosocial aspects (anxiety, sense of
coherence, social support). In this group, predictors accounted for 17.1 to 31.6%
of the variance.
CONCLUSIONS: Different predictors for outcome after total joint arthroplasty were
obtained for THA and TKA patients. Although psychosocial aspects seemed to be
less important in TKA patients, preoperatively, distressed patients of both
groups should be offered interventions to reduce psychological distress to obtain
better outcomes after surgery.

DOI: 10.1186/s12891-018-2058-y 
PMCID: PMC5964720
PMID: 29788969  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Interpers Violence. 2021 Apr;36(7-8):3557-3583. doi: 10.1177/0886260518775161. 
Epub 2018 May 22.

Advancing a Model of Secondary Trauma: Consequences for Victim Service Providers.

Ellis C(1), Knight KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Montana State University, Bozeman, USA.

A burgeoning body of scholarship is attempting to understand, normalize, and
ameliorate the emotional strain of victim service provision. The literature,
however, has yet to fully theorize the hazardous process of empathetic engagement
with victims. As a result, concepts, mechanisms, and outcomes are often
conflated, making it difficult to understand the etiological path of this
occupational risk. The goal of this article is to attend to this gap by
accomplishing three objectives. The first is to engage with the perspective of
symbolic interaction to theoretically ground a conceptual model of secondary
trauma. The second objective is to propose a model of secondary trauma that
acknowledges its inherently interactional, interpretive, and, thus, vicariously
transmissible nature. The third objective is to begin the work of empirically
supporting this model with data from a sample of victim service providers (n =
94) collected using in-depth interviews, focus groups, ethnographic participant
observation, and community-based participatory research. Our findings suggest
that victim service provision, in the form of empathetic engagement, can blur the
boundary between self and other, and lead to a sense of damage in the self that
manifests in unreliable self-agency, untrustworthy coherence of other,
desensitized self-affectivity, and fractured self-history. This work has
significant implications. We illustrate an important paradox by showing how
victim service provision can be helpful to victims but harmful to providers. We
also offer a pathway for reducing this harm. By specifying mechanisms of damage, 
the model can be used to inform policies and practices supportive of victim
service providers' health and well-being.

DOI: 10.1177/0886260518775161 
PMCID: PMC6212337 [Available on 2022-04-01]
PMID: 29788814  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Aging Ment Health. 2019 Aug;23(8):1041-1048. doi: 10.1080/13607863.2018.1471582. 
Epub 2018 May 21.

Me and You in Caregivinghood - Dyadic resistance resources and deficits out of
the informal caregiver's perspective.

Wennerberg MMT(1), Lundgren SM(2), Eriksson M(3), Danielson E(4).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Homecare Health and Nursing, Municipality of Orust , Institute
of Health and Care Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg ,
Gothenburg , Sweden.
(2)b Sahlgrenska Academy, Institute of Health and Care Sciences, University of
Gothenburg , Gothenburg , Sweden.
(3)c Department of Health Sciences , University West, Trollhättan , Trollhättan ,
Sweden.
(4)d Department of Nursing , Mid Sweden University, Östersund, Institute of
Health and Care Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg ,
Gothenburg , Sweden.

Objective: To present Specific and Generalized Resistance Resources (SRRs/GRRs)
and Deficits (SRDs/GRDs) described by 32 informal caregivers as originating from 
themselves and their older adult carerecipients as dyads. Method: Salutogenic
interviewing was used to assemble data from caregivers. A theory-driven,
memo-guided and comparative analysis using within- and across- case analysis was 
applied to unravel resources and deficits influencing the outcomes when they
managed tension associated with caregiving. Findings: Living in fellowship in a
well-functioning dyad unites the essence of having access to dyadic SRRs/GRRs.
Such access enables dyads to use their specific dyadic tension management to
resolve challenges through cooperation, derives 'positive' life-experiences and
preserves dyad functioning. Struggling alone in a malfunctioning dyad indicates
the presence of dyadic SRDs/GRDs counteracting such a development. If these
SRDs/GRDs accumulate, the dyad become less able to resolve challenges, 'negative'
life-experiences accumulates, the carerecipient's capability to cooperate
decreases, caregiver's workload increases, the dyad becomes increasingly
malfunctioning and moves towards the point where caregiving ends due to lack of
usable SRRs/GRRs. Conclusions: Findings reveals the complex duality of caregiving
and the necessity to assess all available SRRs/GRRs and SRDs/GRDs for caregiving 
dyads, including out of the carerecipient's perspective. Appropriate
'salutogenic' support reduces SRDs/GRDs, makes available SRRs/GRRs usable or
provides alternative SRRs/GRRs, thereby dyadic tension management and dyadic
functionality is preserved during this phase of life labelled Caregivinghood. The
study adds new knowledge to the salutogenic framework regarding central,
theoretical concepts and suggests how data for health promoting initiatives
conducted the 'salutogenic way' may be acquired.

DOI: 10.1080/13607863.2018.1471582 
PMID: 29781712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Int Soc Prev Community Dent. 2018 Mar-Apr;8(2):145-152. doi:
10.4103/jispcd.JISPCD_1_18. Epub 2018 Apr 24.

Impact of Sense of Coherence on Oral Health among Bus Drivers: A Cross-Sectional 
Study.

Ahmed SI(1), Sudhir KM(1), Reddy VCS(1), Kumar RVSK(1), Srinivasulu G(1), Deepthi
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health Dentistry, Narayana Dental College and Hospital,
Nellore, Andhra Pradesh, India.

Aim and Objectives: To assess the sense of coherence (SOC) and the impact of SOC 
on oral hygiene behaviors and oral health status among bus drivers in Nellore
district, Andhra Pradesh.
Materials and Methods: A descriptive cross-sectional study was conducted during
August-September 2017. Cluster random sampling methodology was used for the
selection of drivers. Five depots were randomly selected from the list of various
Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation depots in Nellore district. The
estimated sample size was proportionately divided among these five depots of
Nellore district (n = 120). The SOC-related data were obtained using short
version of Antonovsky's SOC scale. Every item was scored on a Likert scale
ranging from 1 to 7. The sum of the scores for SOC was 13-91. A high score
indicates a strong SOC. Clinical examination was done for recording oral health
status using Oral Hygiene Index-simplified (OHI-S), dental caries, periodontal
status, and oral mucosal lesions were recorded according to the WHO criteria
1997. Data were entered and analyzed using SPSS ver. 22 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, 
USA).
Results: Majority of the bus drivers who participated in the study had a low SOC 
(60%). A significant (P < 0.05) positive correlation was observed with age (r =
0.1420), socioeconomic status (r = 0.1467), and visit to dentist (r = 0.1912). A 
nonsignificant negative correlation was observed with habits (r = -0.0681), OHI-S
(r = -0.0772), dental caries (r = -0.0874), Community Periodontal Index (r =
-0.0642), loss of attachment (r = -0.0650), and oral mucosal lesions (r =
-0.0542).
Conclusion: Strong SOC was associated with increase in age, better socioeconomic 
status, good habits, increased frequency of dental visits, and a good oral
health.

DOI: 10.4103/jispcd.JISPCD_1_18 
PMCID: PMC5946523
PMID: 29780740 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


335. Infant Child Dev. 2018 Mar-Apr;27(2):e2067. doi: 10.1002/icd.2067. Epub 2017 Nov 
23.

Adolescents' responses to online peer conflict: How self-evaluation and ethnicity
matter.

Novin S(1), Bos MGN(2), Stevenson CE(2)(3), Rieffe C(2)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Utrecht University Utrecht The Netherlands.
(2)Leiden University Leiden The Netherlands.
(3)University of Amsterdam Amsterdam The Netherlands.
(4)Dutch Foundation for the Deaf and Hard Hearing Child Amsterdam The
Netherlands.
(5)University College London London UK.

For parents, online platforms where their children interact with others often
feel like a "black box" in terms of what exactly is happening. In this study, we 
developed an ecologically valid online computer game in which a
(computer-generated) peer teammate tried to provoke frustration, in order to
examine (a) adolescents' responses and (b) how indices of self-evaluation (i.e., 
sense of coherence and self-esteem) and demographic variables (i.e., gender and
ethnicity) matter to these responses. Like gender, being a member of a minority
or majority group may influence how provocations by peers are interpreted,
influencing how one responds. Fifteen-year-old Dutch and Moroccan-Dutch
adolescents (N = 167) completed self-reports and played the online computer game.
The game indeed elicited frustration, with increased self-reported anger.
Moreover, expressions of displeasure were much more common during and after
provocation than before provocation. Crucially, perceived self-evaluation
mattered; higher levels of sense of coherence but lower levels of self-esteem
(only in Moroccan-Dutch group) contributed to fewer expressions of displeasure.
Gender did not play a moderating role. Our findings provide initial insights into
individual differences in adolescents' responses in an online peer-conflict
situation.Highlights: We studied Dutch and Moroccan-Dutch adolescents' responses 
during online peer provocation and how self-evaluation and demographic variables 
matter.Provocation by the (computer-generated) peer teammate increased
expressions of displeasure.More sense of coherence but less self-esteem was
associated with fewer expressions of displeasure, but ethnicity moderated the
effect with self-esteem.

DOI: 10.1002/icd.2067 
PMCID: PMC5947544
PMID: 29780286 


336. J Clin Nurs. 2018 Oct;27(19-20):3630-3640. doi: 10.1111/jocn.14523. Epub 2018 Jun
21.

From breaking point to breakthrough during the ICU stay: A qualitative study of
family members' experiences of long-term intensive care patients' pathways
towards survival.

Haugdahl HS(1)(2), Eide R(3), Alexandersen I(2), Paulsby TE(2), Stjern B(2), Lund
SB(2), Haugan G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Levanger Hospital, Nord-Trøndelag Hospital Trust, Levanger, Norway.
(2)Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway.
(3)St. Olav University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.

AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: To explore family members' experiences of long-term
intensive care unit (ICU) patients' pathways towards survival and to highlight
family members' efforts to promote the patient's health during the ICU stay.
BACKGROUND: Although considerable research has been devoted to the substantial
burden of long-term ICU patients, less attention has been paid to
health-promoting factors that facilitate patients' health and survival during ICU
stays. Support from family members can improve patient outcome. However, there is
little knowledge of the specific contributions provided by family members.
DESIGN: A hermeneutic phenomenological approach, within the context of
Antonovsky's salutogenic theory and Merleau-Ponty's phenomenology of the body,
involving the body as the fundament of experience and understanding.
METHODS: In-depth qualitative interviews. Thirteen family members of long-term
ICU patients were interviewed once, at six to 18 months after ICU discharge. The 
consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research were used.
RESULTS: Three themes were identified: (i) A body at a breaking point; (ii)
family members' presence; and (iii) breaking through. In the perspective of the
family members, their beloved ones were at a breaking point between life and
death. The family's presence was significantly health promoting, demonstrating
and communicating love and sensitivity. Moreover, family members' understanding
of the patient's unique characteristics and personality was crucial to the
patient's experience of being understood, recognised and acknowledged. Inner
strength represented a life force capable of moving the patient from the breaking
point towards a breakthrough towards life. Family members purposely used their
knowledge about the patient to trigger, nurture and release the patient's inner
strength.
CONCLUSIONS: Family presence helps to trigger, arouse and release a patient's
inner strength, representing important health-promoting factors facilitating
patients' health and survival during an ICU stay.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: Insights into the unique and vital
health-promoting influence of family participation indicate the responsibility of
the ICU team to provide support for families.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jocn.14523 
PMID: 29775992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


337. BMC Womens Health. 2018 May 16;18(1):67. doi: 10.1186/s12905-018-0560-x.

Prevalence of emergency contraceptive pill use among Spanish adolescent girls and
their family and psychological profiles.

Jiménez-Iglesias A(1), Moreno C(2), García-Moya I(3), Rivera F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Psicología Evolutiva y de la Educación, Universidad de
Sevilla, C/ Camilo José Cela, s/n, 41018, Sevilla, Spain. amjimigl@us.es.
(2)Departamento de Psicología Evolutiva y de la Educación, Universidad de
Sevilla, C/ Camilo José Cela, s/n, 41018, Sevilla, Spain.
(3)CRIPACC, School of Health and Social Work, University of Hertfordshire,
Hatfield, UK.
(4)Departamento de Psicología Experimental, Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla,
Spain.

BACKGROUND: Adolescent girls' family context and psychological characteristics
play important roles in their sexual behavior, including the use of the emergency
contraceptive pill (ECP). This study aims to (1) determine the prevalence of ECP 
use among girls who have had sexual intercourse and (2) comparatively analyze
their family and psychological profiles according to whether they have used ECPs.
METHODS: The sample of 1735 Spanish girls aged 15 to 18 came from a
representative sample of the 2014 edition of the Health Behaviour in School-aged 
Children (HBSC) study. Of this sample, 398 girls had sexual intercourse and
reported their ECP use. Data collection for the HBSC study was performed through 
an online questionnaire to which adolescents responded anonymously in school.
Data analyses were descriptive and bivariate and were performed with the
statistical program IBM SPSS Statistics 23.
RESULTS: The results demonstrated that 30.65% of girls who had sexual intercourse
used ECPs. Noticeable differences in paternal knowledge and communication with
the father were observed between girls who used the ECP at least once and those
who did not use it. In contrast, differences between girls who used the ECP once 
and those who used it twice or more were pronounced with regard to parental
knowledge, communication with parents, maternal affection, life satisfaction,
sense of coherence and depression.
CONCLUSIONS: This work demonstrates a high prevalence of ECP use and a more
positive family and psychological profile for girls who used ECP once compared
with those who used it twice or more.

DOI: 10.1186/s12905-018-0560-x 
PMCID: PMC5956739
PMID: 29769104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Acta Odontol Scand. 2018 Nov;76(8):553-558. doi: 10.1080/00016357.2018.1472294.
Epub 2018 May 15.

Association between psychological factors, socio-demographic conditions, oral
habits and anterior open bite in five-year-old children.

Gomes MC(1), Neves ÉTB(1), Perazzo MF(2), Martins CC(2), Paiva SM(2),
Granville-Garcia AF(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Postgraduate Program in Dentistry, State University of Paraiba (UEPB) ,
Campina Grande , Brazil.
(2)b Department of Pediatric Dentistry and Orthodontic , Federal University of
Minas Gerais (UFMG) , Belo Horizonte , Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to evaluate association between
psychological factors, socio-demographic conditions, oral habits and anterior
open bite in five-year-old preschool children.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted with 764 pairs of
children and parents/caregivers in preschools. The parents/caregivers answered
questionnaires addressing oral health-related quality of life (OHRQoL), sense of 
coherence, locus of control, oral habits and socio-demographic characteristics.
The children answered a self-report questionnaire addressing OHRQoL and were
submitted to a clinical examination for the anterior open bite by examiners.
Descriptive analysis was conducted, followed by Poisson's regression analysis.
RESULTS: The prevalence of anterior open bite was 15.2%. The following variables 
remained significantly associated with anterior open bite: pacifier use
(PR = 7.09; 95% CI: 4.06-12.39), attending a public preschool (PR = 2.40; 95% CI:
1.68-3.43), digit sucking (PR = 2.15; 95% CI: 1.27-3.62), greater number of
residents in the home (PR = 1.67; 95% CI: 1.18-2.36) and impact on OHRQoL
according to child's report (PR = 1.56; 95% CI: 1.11-2.20).
CONCLUSIONS: Anterior open bite was associated with OHRQoL according to the
children's reports. Moreover, attending a public preschool, a greater number of
residents in the home, digit sucking and pacifier sucking were associated with
this type of malocclusion.

DOI: 10.1080/00016357.2018.1472294 
PMID: 29764280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Anaesthesist. 2018 Jul;67(7):512-518. doi: 10.1007/s00101-018-0448-z. Epub 2018
May 14.

[Sense of Coherence Scale according to Antonovsky as a possible predictor for
return to work for cardiac surgery intensive care patients].

[Article in German]

Benstoem C(1), Wübker R(2), Lüngen M(2), Breuer T(3), Marx G(3), Autschbach R(2),
Goetzenich A(2), Schnoering H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Operative Intensivmedizin und Intermediate Care, Medizinische
Fakultät RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Deutschland. cbenstoem@ukaachen.de.
(2)Klinik für Thorax‑, Herz‑ und Gefäßchirurgie, Medizinische Fakultät RWTH
Aachen, Pauwelsstr. 30, 52074, Aachen, Deutschland.
(3)Klinik für Operative Intensivmedizin und Intermediate Care, Medizinische
Fakultät RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Deutschland.

BACKGROUND: For cardiac surgery patients who were employed prior to surgery, the 
return to their professional life is of special importance. In addition to
medical reasons, such as pre-existing conditions, the success of the operation or
postoperative course and patient-intrinsic reasons, which can be assessed with
the Sense of Coherence (SOC) scale by Antonovsky, may also play a role in the
question of a possible return into working life.
METHODS: In this study 278 patients (invasive coronary artery bypass graft
surgery and/or surgery on heart valves, age < 60 years, employed) were questioned
postoperatively via post with the SOC questionnaire. The SOC questionnaire was
used in addition to questions about return to work. The cohort was stratified
according to the time of return to work. Subsequently, the point of maximum
sensitivity and specificity was determined for the total SOC score and the
prediction power was considered.
RESULTS: Of the 278 patients, 61 questionnaires (22%) were considered as eligible
and included in the analysis. Of these, 47 participants had returned to work
after undergoing cardiac surgery and 14 participants had not. We observed
significant differences in SOC values between both groups (146.07 ± 29.76 versus 
124.29 ± 28.8, p = 0.020). Patients that returned to work within the first
6 months after surgery showed even higher SOC scores (148.56 ± 28.98, p = 0.034).
CONCLUSION: Patients with an SOC score < 130 are at greater risk not to return to
their professional life after cardiac surgery. The SOC is an easily obtainable
score that reliably predicts the probability of return to work after cardiac
surgery.

DOI: 10.1007/s00101-018-0448-z 
PMID: 29761259  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Psychiatriki. 2018 Jan-Mar;29(1):52-57. doi: 10.22365/jpsych.2018.291.52.

Promoting healthy lives and well-being for all: The contribution of the
International College of Person-Centered Medicine (ICPCM).

Christodoulou GN(1), Mezzich JE(2), Cloninger CR(3), Christodoulou N(4), Villar
E(5), Appleyard J(6), Botbol M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Hellenic Psychiatric Association, Athens University Medical School, Athens,
Greece.
(2)Icahn School of Medicine, Mount Sinai, New York.
(3)Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA.
(4)University of Nottingham and Queen's Medical Center, Nottingham, UK.
(5)World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
(6)International College of Person-Centered Medicine, London, UK.
(7)Medical School, University of Breste, France.

This article defines the scope of Person-Centered Medicine, traces its roots in
ancient conceptions, explains the reasons for the revival of this perspective in 
our times, and highlights the contribution of the International College of
Person-Centered Medicine (ICPCM) in the promotion of the personcentered
perspective in health and disease. The value of communication is underlined with 
reference to both diagnosis and treatment. The concept of Health is considered
historically and the inclusiveness, holistic vista and positive health
orientation of the WHO definition of Health (1948) is underlined. It is
emphasized that Mental Health Promotion is differentiated conceptually from
Disease Prevention in that promotion deals with health and prevention deals with 
illness, the relationship of Health Promotion with Salutogenesis (Antonovsky
1996) is noted and it is pointed out that among the targets of health promotion, 
preservation of peace is also included (WHO, 2004). In line with this, the ICPCM 
has supported and co-signed the Athens Anti-War Declaration (2016). Evaluating
the impact of Health Promotion efforts is a necessary but difficult task as it
requires targeted research and there are many inherent confounding factors. The
social or environmental contexts of health behaviors should be taken into account
as well as the subjective indicators of health. In an attempt to resolve the
difficulties arising from this issue, the ICPCM has developed a prototype
"Person-centered Care Index" (Kirisci et al 2016). With reference to Education it
is pointed out that it is necessary for the educators to speak with the students 
rather than speak to them. Concerning research, the ICPCM in its 2013 Geneva
Declaration has identified the main research areas in the person-centered field. 
The importance of assuring healthy lives and well-being for ALL is underlined and
the difficulties associated with the achievement of this goal are noted. Lastly, 
the need to apply the principles of Person-centered Medicine to victims of
natural, human-made and economic disasters (Christodoulou et al 2016) is
underlined, especially in view of the frequent occurrence of these disasters in
our times. In conclusion, the contribution of the ICPCM during the ten years of
its existence, with reference to the sensitization of health professionals in the
Person-centered approach is noted. This contribution has been carried out in line
with the principles of the ICPCM and with its Geneva Declarations.

DOI: 10.22365/jpsych.2018.291.52 
PMID: 29754120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Adv Nurs. 2018 May 12. doi: 10.1111/jan.13708. [Epub ahead of print]

Salutogenic service user involvement in nursing research: A case study.

Mjøsund NH(1), Vinje HF(2), Eriksson M(3), Haaland-Øverby M(1), Jensen SL(1),
Kjus S(1), Norheim I(1), Portaasen IL(1), Espnes GA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Health Research and Development, Vestre Viken Hospital
Trust, Drammen, Norway.
(2)Department of Health, Social and Welfare Studies, Faculty of Health and Social
Sciences, University of South-Eastern Norway, Norway, Kongsberg, Norway.
(3)Center on Salutogenesis, Department of Health Sciences, University West,
Trollhättan, Sweden.
(4)NTNU Center for Health Promotion Research, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Trondheim, Norway.

AIM: The aim was to explore the process of involving mental healthcare service
users in a mental health promotion research project as research advisors and to
articulate features of the collaboration which encouraged and empowered the
advisors to make significant contributions to the research process and outcome.
BACKGROUND: There is an increasing interest in evaluating aspects of service user
involvement in nursing research. Few descriptions exist of features that enable
meaningful service user involvement. We draw on experiences from conducting
research which used the methodology interpretative phenomenological analysis to
explore how persons with mental disorders perceived mental health. Apart from the
participants in the project, five research advisors with service user experience 
were involved in the entire research process.
DESIGN: We applied a case study design to explore the ongoing processes of
service user involvement.
METHODS: Documents and texts produced while conducting the project (2012-2016),
as well as transcripts from multistage focus group discussions with the research 
advisors, were analysed.
RESULTS: The level of involvement was dynamic and varied throughout the different
stages of the research process. Six features: leadership, meeting structure, role
clarification, being members of a team, a focus on possibilities and being seen
and treated as holistic individuals, were guiding principles for a salutogenic
service user involvement. These features strengthened the advisors' perception of
themselves as valuable and competent contributors.
CONCLUSION: Significant contributions from research advisors were promoted by
facilitating the process of involvement. A supporting structure and atmosphere
were consistent with a salutogenic service user involvement.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jan.13708 
PMID: 29752825 


342. Wien Med Wochenschr. 2018 Oct;168(13-14):350-360. doi: 10.1007/s10354-018-0619-1.
Epub 2018 May 8.

Long-term improvement of the bio-psycho-social state of cancer patients after
3 weeks of inpatient oncological rehabilitation : A long-term study at the
Humanomed Zentrum Althofen.

Klocker J(1)(2), Klocker-Kaiser U(3)(4), Pipam W(3)(4), Geissler D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Humanomedzentrum Althofen, Moorweg 1, 9330, Althofen, Austria.
j.klocker@ipso.at.
(2)Institut für Psychosoziale Onkologie (IPSO), Brunnengasse 3, 9020, Klagenfurt,
Austria. j.klocker@ipso.at.
(3)Humanomedzentrum Althofen, Moorweg 1, 9330, Althofen, Austria.
(4)Klinikum Klagenfurt, Klagenfurt, Austria.

A 3-week cancer rehabilitation program was conducted at the Humanomed Zentrum
Althofen, comprising therapy of organic defects, lifestyle modification, and
psycho-social support. Therapeutic efficacy was assessed in comprehensive surveys
before and after the therapy, and after 6 and 12 months. The study covers
a 5-year period with data from 3233 patients. Parameters of subjective health
assessed according to the European Quality of Life - 5 Dimensions (EuroQol EQ-5D)
standard and signifying quality of life showed significant improvement both
immediately after the therapy, and after 6 and 12 months. Anxiety and depression,
assessed according to the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, were
significantly and persistently diminished, and the sense of coherence elevated.
Therapeutic success was somewhat dependent on socio-economic parameters, but was 
largely independent of income and cancer type. This study thus clearly documents 
the significant efficacy of a rehabilitation treatment based on bio-psycho-social
concepts, which may be further improved by additional ambulant or stationary
care.

DOI: 10.1007/s10354-018-0619-1 
PMID: 29737478  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Forensic Sci Int. 2018 Jul;288:72-80. doi: 10.1016/j.forsciint.2018.04.030. Epub 
2018 Apr 25.

Critical analysis of forensic cut-offs and legal thresholds: A coherent approach 
to inference and decision.

Biedermann A(1), Taroni F(2), Bozza S(3), Augsburger M(4), Aitken CGG(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of Lausanne, School of Criminal Justice, 1015 Lausanne-Dorigny,
Switzerland. Electronic address: alex.biedermann@unil.ch.
(2)University of Lausanne, School of Criminal Justice, 1015 Lausanne-Dorigny,
Switzerland.
(3)Ca'Foscari University Venice, Department of Economics, 30121 Venice, Italy;
University of Lausanne, School of Criminal Justice, 1015 Lausanne-Dorigny,
Switzerland.
(4)University Center of Legal Medicine Lausanne - Geneva, Forensic Toxicology and
Chemistry Unit, 1000 Lausanne 25, Switzerland.
(5)University of Edinburgh, School of Mathematics, EH9 3FD Edinburgh, Scotland,
United Kingdom.

In this paper we critically discuss the definition and use of cut-off values by
forensic scientists, for example in forensic toxicology, and point out when and
why such values - and ensuing categorical conclusions - are inappropriate
concepts for helping recipients of expert information with their questions of
interest. Broadly speaking, a cut-off is a particular value of results of
analyses of a target substance (e.g., a toxic substance or one of its metabolites
in biological sample from a person of interest), defined in a way such as to
enable scientists to suggest conclusions regarding the condition of the person of
interest. The extent to which cut-offs can be reliably defined and used is not
unanimously agreed within the forensic science community, though many
practitioners - especially in operational laboratories - rely on cut-offs for
reasons such as ease of use and simplicity. In our analysis, we challenge this
practice by arguing that choices made for convenience should not be to the
detriment of balance and coherence. To illustrate our discussion, we will choose 
the example of alcohol markers in hair, used widely by forensic toxicologists to 
reach conclusions regarding the drinking behaviour of individuals. Using real
data from one of the co-authors' own work and recommendations of cut-offs
published by relevant professional organisations, we will point out in what sense
cut-offs are incompatible with current evaluative guidelines (e.g., [31]) and
show how to proceed logically without cut-offs by using a standard measure for
evidential value. Our conclusions run counter to much current practice, but are
inevitable given the inherent definitional and conceptual shortcomings of
scientific cut-offs. We will also point out the difference between scientific
cut-offs and legal thresholds and argue that the latter - but not the former -
are justifiable and can be dealt with in logical evaluative procedures.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.forsciint.2018.04.030 
PMID: 29734052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Intensive Crit Care Nurs. 2019 Feb;50:103-110. doi: 10.1016/j.iccn.2018.04.007.
Epub 2018 May 3.

The health promoting conversations intervention for families with a critically
ill relative: A pilot study.

Ågren S(1), Eriksson A(2), Fredrikson M(3), Hollman-Frisman G(4), Orwelius L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery and Department of Medical and Health
Sciences, Linköping University, Sweden. Electronic address: Susanna.Agren@liu.se.
(2)Department of Intensive Care, Linköping University, County Council of
Östergötland, Linköping, Sweden. Electronic address:
Anna.J.Eriksson@regionostergotland.se.
(3)Division of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Department of Clinical
and Experimental Medicine and Forum Östergötland, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden. Electronic address: Mats.fredrikson@liu.se.
(4)Anesthetics, Operations and Speciality Surgery Center and Department of
Medical and Health Sciences, Linköping University, 581 85 Linköping, Sweden.
Electronic address: Gunilla.Hollman.Frisman@liu.se.
(5)Department of Intensive Care, Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping
University, County Council of Östergötland, Linköping, Sweden. Electronic
address: Lotti.Orvelius@regionostergotland.se.

BACKGROUND: After intensive care unit treatment, patients often have prolonged
impairments that affect their physical, cognitive and mental health. Family
members can face overwhelming and emotionally challenging situations and their
concerns and needs must be addressed.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the outcomes of pilot randomised control trial, a
nurse-led family intervention, Health Promoting Conversations, which focused on
family functioning and wellbeing in families with a critically ill member.
STUDY DESIGN: This randomised controlled pilot study used a pre-test, post-test
design with intervention and control groups to investigate the outcomes of the
nurse-led intervention in 17 families.
OUTCOME MEASURES: The Health Promoting Conversations intervention was evaluated
using validated instruments that measure family functioning and family wellbeing:
the General Functioning sub-scale from the McMaster Family Assessment Device; the
Family Sense of Coherence, the Herth Hope Index, and the Medical Outcome
Short-Form Health Survey. Descriptive and analytical statistical methods were
used to analyse the data.
RESULTS: After 12 months, the intervention group reported better family
functioning than the control group. The intervention group also had better social
functioning and mental health after 12 months.
CONCLUSION: This intervention may improve family wellbeing by improving family
function, reducing stress, and promoting better mental health.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.iccn.2018.04.007 
PMID: 29731406  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Eat Weight Disord. 2020 Feb;25(1):69-78. doi: 10.1007/s40519-018-0506-1. Epub
2018 May 3.

Illness perception in overweight and obese patients with cardiovascular diseases.

Pokrajac-Bulian A(1), Ambrosi-Randić N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences,
University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia. pokrajac@ffri.hr.
(2)Department of Interdisciplinary, Italian, and Cultural Studies, Juraj Dobrila 
University of Pula, Pula, Croatia.

OBJECTIVE: This study explored the relationship of illness perception with
different aspects of cardiac anxiety, general anxiety and depression in a sample 
of male and female overweight and obese patients with cardiovascular diseases
(CVD).
STUDY DESIGN: The clinical sample included 165 adults (113 males) aged from 32 to
89 years. The patients were admitted to the Department of Cardiology and Cardiac 
Rehabilitation for a major cardiovascular event, acute myocardial infarction or
myocardial revascularization.
MEASUREMENTS: Psychological measurement included questionnaires of illness
perception, cardiac anxiety, general anxiety and depression.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Illness perception and cardiac anxiety in patients with 
CVD were associated with anxiety and depression. Regression analysis showed that 
illness perception accounts for a significant proportion of the variance in both 
anxiety and depression for males, but not for females. Gender-specific
interrelations between perceptions of CVD and indices of mental health have an
implication for interventions to maximize the effect of therapy with these
patients.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level V, Descriptive study.

DOI: 10.1007/s40519-018-0506-1 
PMID: 29726000  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Caries Res. 2018;52(6):570-579. doi: 10.1159/000488210. Epub 2018 May 3.

Impact of Caries Severity/Activity and Psychological Aspects of Caregivers on
Oral Health-Related Quality of Life among 5-Year-Old Children.

Granville-Garcia AF(1), Gomes MC(2), Perazzo MF(3), Martins CC(3), Abreu MHNG(4),
Paiva SM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dentistry, State University of Paraíba, Campina Grande,
Brazilanaflaviagg@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Dentistry, State University of Paraíba, Campina Grande, Brazil.
(3)Department of Pediatric Dentistry and Orthodontics, Federal University of
Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(4)Department of Public Health, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte, Brazil.

The aim of the present study was to evaluate the influence of the
severity/activity of dental caries as well as sense of coherence (SOC) and locus 
of control (LOC) on oral health-related quality of life (OHRQoL) among 5-year-old
children. A cross-sectional study was conducted involving 769 children at schools
in a city in northeast Brazil. Parents/caregivers answered validated
questionnaires addressing SOC and LOC. The children and parents/caregivers
answered their respective modules of the Brazilian version of the Scale of Oral
Health Outcomes for 5-year-old children (SOHO-5). Data were also collected on
sociodemographic characteristics, visits to the dentist, and the occurrence of
toothache. Clinical examinations were performed by 2 trained examiners. A
directed acyclic graph was used to select covariates for statistical adjustment, 
and logistic regression for complex samples was used to test associations between
the dependent and independent variables (α = 5%). For parents/caregivers, the
variables associated with a negative impact on OHRQoL were the occurrence of
toothache (odds ratio, OR: 10.53; 95% confidence interval, CI: 6.34-17.51; p <
0.001) and a low SOC (OR: 2.17; 95% CI: 1.37-3.43; p = 0.001). According to the
children's perceptions, the following variables were associated with a negative
impact on OHRQoL: toothache (OR: 3.58; 95% CI: 2.30-5.55; p < 0.001), caries
activity (OR: 1.97; 95% CI: 1.07-3.62; p = 0.028), and traumatic dental injury
(OR: 1.71; 95% CI: 1.15-2.53; p = 0.007). Among parents/caregivers, a low SOC led
to poorer OHRQoL. For the children, however, neither psychological aspect
affected OHRQoL. In the perception of both the parents/caregivers and children,
toothache was the oral condition that exerted a negative impact on OHRQoL.

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000488210 
PMID: 29723865  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Nurs Educ. 2018 May 1;57(5):296-299. doi: 10.3928/01484834-20180420-08.

Type D Personality as a Predictor of Resilience Among Nursing Students.

Škodová Z, Bánovčinová L.

BACKGROUND: Understanding the factors that influence resilience is especially
important in the context of emotionally demanding work environments in health
care. The aim of this study is to examine the associations between Type D
personality and resilience among nursing students.
METHOD: A correlational study design was used, and 150 baccalaureate nursing
students participated. The Type D personality subscale, sense of coherence
questionnaire, and Baruth protective factors inventory were used. Linear
regression analysis and Student's t tests were used.
RESULTS: The negative affectivity subscale of the Type D scale was a significant 
predictor for resilience and sense of coherence. Students with high levels of
Type D characteristics had significantly lower levels of resilience and sense of 
coherence.
CONCLUSION: It would be beneficial to include specific interventions for
decreasing negative affectivity and promoting stress coping skills training in
the training programs in nursing school curricula. [J Nurs Educ.
2018;57(5):296-299.].

Copyright 2018, SLACK Incorporated.

DOI: 10.3928/01484834-20180420-08 
PMID: 29718520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2018 May 18;24(6):1352-1360. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izy013.

Revealing the Puzzle of Nonadherence in IBD-Assembling the Pieces.

Eindor-Abarbanel A(1), Naftali T(2), Ruhimovich N(2), Bar-Gil Shitrit A(3),
Sklerovsky-Benjaminov F(2), Konikoff F(2), Matalon S(1), Shirin H(1), Milgrom
Y(3), Broide E(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Kamila Gonczarowski Institute of Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases,
Assaf Harofeh Medical Center, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Meir Medical Center, Sackler
School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Digestive Diseases Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.

Comment in
    Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2019 Apr 11;25(5):e52.

Background: Adherence is generally associated with improved treatment outcomes in
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) patients. Different components of the patient
profile have an impact on patient adherence. Capturing nonadherent patients by
identifying modifiable risk factors in daily practice still remains a challenge. 
The objective of this study was to identify modifiable and nonmodifiable risk
factors for nonadherence in IBD patients.
Methods: Patients filled out questionnaires including demographic, clinical, and 
socioeconomic information and accessibility to gastrointestinal services.
Psychological features were assessed using the Sense of Coherence, Hospital
Anxiety and Depression Scale, IBD-Self Efficacy, and Brief Illness Perception
(BIPQ) questionnaires. Adherence to treatment was evaluated using the Morisky
score.
Results: The study included 311 patients: 62.4% females, median age 34.78 years, 
70.4% Crohn's disease (CD). Multivariate analysis was done in 3 sections:
demographic and disease characteristics, communication with medical staff, and
psychological aspects; all included sex and disease type. Ulcerative colitis (UC)
patients were less adherent (odds ratio [OR], 1.792; OR, 1.915; OR, 1.748;
respectively). Females were less adherent in 2 sections (OR, 1.841; OR, 1.751;
respectively). Employment (OR, 2.449), low score in on the BIPQ-understanding of 
disease (OR, 0.881), and poor communication with the gastroenterologist (OR,
1.798) were also predictors of low adherence.
Conclusions: Nonmodifiable characteristics such as female sex and UC are
associated with low adherence. Good communication with the treating physician and
understanding the disease are modifiable factors associated with high adherence. 
Early intervention might improve patients' adherence.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izy013 
PMID: 29718228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Am Psychoanal Assoc. 2018 Apr;66(2):289-303. doi: 10.1177/0003065118770332.

Illusionment and Disillusionment: Foundational Illusions and the Loss of a World.

Margulies A.

One can only be disillusioned if once one lived within illusions-and so
disillusionment is always after the fact ( après coup or nachträglich), as
illusions come into view even as they are crumbling within. With a crisis of
disillusionment-or existential disillusionment-one falls away from a coherence of
meaning, revealing a system of intertwined fundamental illusions that had always 
been lived within and implicit, part of one's being-in-the-world, and that now
seem broken, strange, and uncanny. This way of being that one recognizes only
retrospectively may be called "illusionment," a state of being apprehended in the
very process of its falling apart. That is, prior to disillusionment, there may
not have been an illusion as such; rather, there was some overall
effective-enough, taken-for-granted coherence, an experience of world and being
that now comes into view and seems broken precisely because it no longer holds
together. For example, a sense of a common "we" might be revealed to be so flawed
as to have been a fiction, a fantasy, a set of pervasive, interwoven illusions
that one had once naively lived within as unquestioned beliefs. Severe
disillusionment, then, carries with it a sense of falling out of the once
taken-for-granted world, undermining a sense of solid existential grounding.
Saturating all aspects of the psyche, traumatizing disillusionments may lead to a
lifelong cascade of après coup attempts to find new grounding in how to live, as 
one attempts to repair this world-broken-ness.

DOI: 10.1177/0003065118770332 
PMID: 29708419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Relig Health. 2019 Aug;58(4):1095-1106. doi: 10.1007/s10943-018-0631-1.

Changes and Predictors of the Sense of Meaning in Life in Polish University
Students Participating in Psychological Workshops Communication-Forgiveness-Love.

Kuk A(1), Guszkowska M(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Faculty of Physical Education, Józef Piłsudski University of Physical
Education in Warsaw, Marymoncka 34, 00-968, Warsaw, Poland. annakuk1@wp.pl.
(2)The Faculty of Rehabilitation, Józef Piłsudski University of Physical
Education in Warsaw, Marymocka 34, 00-968, Warsaw, Poland.

The aim of this study was to determine changes in the sense of meaning in life of
university students who participated in psychological workshops
"Communication-Forgiveness-Love". The study evaluated 33 university students from
first-cycle and second-cycle studies in physical education in the Józef Piłsudski
University of Physical Education in Warsaw. The Reker's Life Attitude
Profile-Revised Questionnaire, Social Competencies Questionnaire (KKS) by
Matczak, Emotional Intelligence Questionnaire (INTE) by Schutte et al. and the
Goldberg's General Health Questionnaire GHQ-28 were used. The study found that
psychological workshops can be effective in instilling the sense of meaning in
life in university students, especially those from first-cycle studies. The
workshops can produce more benefits to students with worse mental status and with
lower social competencies.

DOI: 10.1007/s10943-018-0631-1 
PMCID: PMC6606651
PMID: 29705828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Psychiatr Pol. 2018 Feb 28;52(1):157-164. doi: 10.12740/PP/76732. Epub 2018 Feb
28.

The "PsychoŻak" program - an example of using positive concepts of mental health 
in practice.

[Article in English, Polish]

Sokołowska E(1), Kluczyńska S(1), Zabłocka-Żytka L(1), Wojda-Kornacka J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Akademia Pedagogiki Specjalnej im. Marii Grzegorzewskiej, Instytut
Psychologii, Warszawa.

For years experts have been advocating the need to develop an individual's health
potential, which enables him/her to maintain health and improve his/her effective
functioning in difficult situations. A number of positive mental health models
have been created, among others: the functional model of mental health, the
complete state model of health, the salutogenic model and the model of
psychological well-being. They cover both optimal and unfavorable aspects of
human functioning. The article presents an authorial program for mental health
promotion - "PsychoŻak", which is based on the positive concepts of mental
health, a review of empirical reports concerning health promotion and on the
target group's expectations. The program is addressed to young adults studying at
universities as well as final-year secondary school students. Its aim is to
strengthen students' psychological, emotional, somatic, and social well-being. It
can be used by higher education institutions and thus be a tool satisfying the
demand for mental health promotion at universities.

DOI: 10.12740/PP/76732 
PMID: 29704422  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


352. BMC Urol. 2018 Apr 24;18(1):27. doi: 10.1186/s12894-018-0340-9.

What predicts emotional response in men awaiting prostate biopsy?

Groarke A(1), Curtis R(2), Walsh DMJ(2), Sullivan FJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
annmarie.groarke@nuigalway.ie.
(2)School of Psychology, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
(3)Prostate Cancer Institute, National University of Ireland Galway, Galway,
Ireland.

BACKGROUND: Incidence of prostate cancer is increasing as opportunistic screening
becomes widespread and life expectancy rises. Despite screening availability,
research reveals conflicting results on medical outcomes, for example, disease
specific mortality. However the gold standard in early diagnosis of potentially
curable organ confined prostate cancer is transrectal ultrasound-guided
systematic prostate biopsy (TRUS-BX). While focus has been given to medical
sequalae there is a paucity of research on the psychological impact of biopsy.
Awaiting biopsy may be inherently stressful but no studies to date, have assessed
men's perception of stress and its impact on emotional response. This study,
therefore, examines the role of stress and also personal resources namely,
self-efficacy and sense of coherence in emotional adjustment in men awaiting a
prostate biopsy.
METHODS: Men attending a Rapid Access Prostate Cancer Clinic for a transrectal
prostate biopsy (N = 114) participated in the study. They completed self report
questionnaires on perceived stress (PSS), generalised self-efficacy (GSES), and
sense of coherence (SOC). Adjustment was measured by the Profile of Mood States
(POMS-B) which assesses tension, depression, anger, fatigue, confusion and
vigour.
RESULTS: Hierarchical regression analyses demonstrated that the set of predictors
accounted for 17%-34% of variance across six mood states and predicted 46% of
total mood disturbance. Perceived stress explained variance on all domains
(11%-26%) with high stress linked to poor functioning.
CONCLUSION: Perceived stress was the strongest and most consistent predictor of
emotional adjustment. This is an important finding as stress appraisal has not
been examined previously in this context and suggests that stress management is
an important target to enhance emotional wellbeing of men attending for a
prostate biopsy.

DOI: 10.1186/s12894-018-0340-9 
PMCID: PMC5922026
PMID: 29699543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Inj Prev. 2018 Jun;24(Suppl 1):i67-i73. doi: 10.1136/injuryprev-2017-042692. Epub
2018 Apr 25.

Human rights-based approach to unintentional injury prevention.

MacKay JM(1), Ryan MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Department, Safe Kids Worldwide, Washington, DC, USA.
(2)Global Network Department, Safe Kids Worldwide, Washington, DC, USA.

Unintentional injury remains an important global public health issue, and efforts
to address it are often hampered by a lack of visibility, leadership, funding,
infrastructure, capacity and evidence of effective solutions. The growing support
for a socioecological model and a systems approach to prevention-along with the
acknowledgement that injury prevention can be a byproduct of salutogenic design
and activities-has increased opportunities to integrate unintentional injury
prevention into other health promotion and disease prevention agendas. It has
also helped to integrate it into the broader human development agenda through the
Sustainable Development Goals. This growing support provides new opportunities to
use a human rights-based approach to address the issue. The human rights-based
approach is based on the idea that all members of society have social, economic
and cultural rights and that governments are responsible and accountable for
upholding those rights. It incorporates a systems approach, addresses inequity
and places an emphasis on the most vulnerable corners of humanity. It also
leverages legal statutes and provides organisations with the opportunity to build
existing international goals and benchmarks into their monitoring efforts. This
paper describes the approach and highlights how it can leverage attention and
investment to address current challenges for unintentional injury.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/injuryprev-2017-042692 
PMID: 29695494  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


354. Med J Armed Forces India. 2018 Apr;74(2):158-161. doi:
10.1016/j.mjafi.2017.08.001. Epub 2017 Oct 5.

Sense of coherence and self reported health amongst medical students: A cross
sectional study.

Rai A(1), Sindhu A(2), Dudeja P(3), Sirohi YS(4), Mukherji S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Cadet, Armed Forces Medical College, Pune 411040, India.
(2)Resident, Department of Community Medicine, Armed Forces Medical College, Pune
411040, India.
(3)Associate Professor, Department of Community Medicine, Armed Forces Medical
College, Pune 411040, India.
(4)Professor, Department of Internal Medicine, Armed Forces Medical College, Pune
411040, India.
(5)PMO, HQ Central Air Command, Indian Air Force, Allahabad, India.

Background: In late 70s, Antonovsky proposed a salutogenic theory. This theory
was based on the assumption that the human environment causes stress, and sense
of coherence could serve as a stress-resisting resource. This study examined
association between sense of coherence and self rated health of medical students.
The aim of this study was to determine the association between sense of coherence
and self reported health among medical students.
Methods: This was a cross-sectional analytical study conducted among medical
students. The study tool used was a pre-designed, pre-tested, structured and self
administered questionnaire (SOC scale and the SF 12 version 2 self-rated health
measure). 172 medical students participated in the study. The data collected was 
entered into Microsoft Excel and analyzed using SPSS 20. All students were
educated about sense of coherence after the study.
Results: Among the respondents, there were 99 (57.6%) female students, and 73
(42.4%) were male. The mean age of the students was 20.8 + 1.20 years. The mean
(±SD) SOC scale score was 56.15 (±7.83). The mean self rated health score was
53.52 (±7.11). Pearson's χ2 test was used to determine the association and there 
was significant association between students SOC and self reported health
(p < 0.000).
Conclusion: There is a significant association between score of sense of
coherence scale and self rated health among medical students.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mjafi.2017.08.001 
PMCID: PMC5912107
PMID: 29692483 


355. BMJ Open. 2018 Apr 23;8(4):e018501. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-018501.

A strong sense of coherence associated with reduced risk of anxiety disorder
among women in disadvantaged circumstances: British population study.

Remes O(1), Wainwright NWJ(2), Surtees P(1), Lafortune L(1), Khaw KT(2), Brayne
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Cambridge Institute of Public
Health, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Many patients receiving medical treatment for anxiety relapse or do
not improve. Research has therefore been turning to coping mechanisms as a way to
decrease anxiety rates. Previously, we showed that living in a deprived area
significantly increases the risk of anxiety in women, but not in men. The
objective of this study is to assess whether sense of coherence (coping
mechanism) buffers the influence of area deprivation on women's risk of
generalised anxiety disorder using data from the European Prospective
Investigation of Cancer-Norfolk.
DESIGN: Large, population study.
SETTING: UK population-based cohort.
PARTICIPANTS: 30 445 people over the age of 40 years were recruited through
general practice registers in England. Of these, 20 919 completed a structured
health and lifestyle questionnaire used to assess generalised anxiety disorder
and sense of coherence. Area deprivation was measured using 1991 Census data, and
sense of coherence and anxiety were examined in 1996-2000. 10 183 women had data 
on all variables.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Past-year generalised anxiety disorder defined according to
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition.
RESULTS: In this study, 2.6% (260/10 183) of women had generalised anxiety
disorder. In those with a strong sense of coherence, area deprivation was not
significantly associated with anxiety (OR 1.29, 95% CI 0.77 to 2.17). However,
among women with a weak sense of coherence, those living in deprived areas were
almost twice as likely to have generalised anxiety disorder compared with those
living in more affluent areas (OR 1.99, 95% CI 1.37 to 2.91).
CONCLUSION: The number of women living in deprived conditions is large worldwide,
and significant numbers are affected by generalised anxiety disorder. Sense of
coherence moderates the association between area deprivation and anxiety in
women; therefore, interventions targeting coping mechanisms may need to be
considered for people with anxiety.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-018501 
PMCID: PMC5914722
PMID: 29685997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: OR received a PhD
studentship from the National Institute for Health Research.


356. Int J Hypertens. 2018 Feb 22;2018:2858253. doi: 10.1155/2018/2858253. eCollection
2018.

A Proposed Middle-Range Theory of Nursing in Hypertension Care.

Drevenhorn E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden.

Nursing in hypertension care comprises counselling about lifestyle changes, blood
pressure measurement, and being a translator for the physician. For the patient, 
changing lifestyle means performing self-care. As not much in the form of
research and guidelines for nurses is available, a middle-range theory of nursing
in hypertension care was developed to guide nurses in their practice, in order to
improve the nursing of patients and design studies for investigating nursing in
hypertension care. Concepts are presented related to the patient (attitude and
beliefs regarding health and sickness, autonomy, personality and traits, level of
perceived vulnerability, hardiness, sense of coherence, locus of control,
self-efficacy, and access to social support and network) and the nursing
(applying theories and models for behavioural change in the consultation and
using counselling skills, patient advocacy, empowerment, professional knowledge
and health education, and supporting the patient). Then the concepts related to
the consultation (communication, shared decision-making, concordance, coping,
adherence, and self-care) are integrated with Orem's theory of nursing. Clinical 
and research implications of the theory are discussed.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/2858253 
PMCID: PMC5842681
PMID: 29682342 


357. J Clin Periodontol. 2018 Jul;45(7):768-779. doi: 10.1111/jcpe.12906. Epub 2018
Jun 19.

Periodontitis and quality of life: What is the role of socioeconomic status,
sense of coherence, dental service use and oral health practices? An exploratory 
theory-guided analysis on a Norwegian population.

Holde GE(1)(2), Baker SR(3), Jönsson B(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Dentistry, Faculty of Health Sciences, UiT the Arctic
University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
(2)The Public Dental Health Service Competence Centre of Northern Norway, Tromsø,
Norway.
(3)Academic Unit of Oral Health, Dentistry and Society, School of Clinical
Dentistry, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(4)Department of Periodontology, Institute of Odontology, The Sahlgrenska
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

AIM: To utilise Andersen's behavioural model for health services' use as the
theoretical framework to examine direct and indirect relationships between
population characteristics, oral health behaviours and periodontitis and oral
health impacts.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The model was tested in a general adult population
(n = 1,886) in Norway, using structural equation modelling. Socioeconomic status,
sense of coherence (SOC), dental anxiety, perceived treatment need, oral health
behaviours and oral health impact profile (OHIP-14) were collected through
questionnaire. Periodontal examinations consisted of full-mouth recordings.
RESULTS: Andersen's model explained a large part of the variance in use of dental
services (58%) and oral health-related impacts (55%), and to a less extent
periodontitis (19%). More social structure and stronger SOC was related to more
enabling resources, which in turn was associated with more use of dental
services. More use of dental services was related to more periodontitis and more 
periodontitis was associated with increased oral health impacts. A stronger SOC
was associated with less oral impacts. There was no association between use of
dental services and oral health impacts.
CONCLUSIONS: The result demonstrated complex relationships between population
characteristics, oral health-related behaviours and oral health outcomes.
Socioeconomic factors and smoking were main predictors of periodontitis. Regular 
dental visiting habits did not, however, reduce the likelihood of periodontitis.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcpe.12906 
PMID: 29681132  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Psychiatry Res. 2018 Jun;264:366-373. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2018.04.011. Epub
2018 Apr 4.

Associations of early childhood adversities with mental disorders, psychological 
functioning, and suitability for psychotherapy in adulthood.

Heinonen E(1), Knekt P(2), Härkänen T(2), Virtala E(2), Lindfors O(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Helsinki, Finland. Electronic address: erkki.heinonen@thl.fi.
(2)National Institute for Health and Welfare, Mannerheimintie 166, Helsinki,
Finland.

Childhood adversities frequently precede adulthood depression and anxiety. Yet,
how they impact needed treatment duration, type or focus in these common
disorders, is unclear. For developing more individualized and precise
interventions, we investigated whether specific early adversities associate with 
patients' distinct psychiatric problems, psychological vulnerabilities, and
suitability for psychotherapy. A total of 221 depressed and anxious adult
outpatients (excluding psychotic, severe personality, bipolar, and substance
abuse disorders) referred from community, student, occupational, and private
healthcare services filled the Childhood Family Atmosphere Questionnaire (CFAQ). 
They also filled self-reports on interpersonal behavior and problems, perceived
competence, dispositional optimism, sense of coherence, defenses, and psychiatric
history. Clinicians assessed the patients' symptomatology, personality, object
relations, cognitive performance, and psychotherapy suitability. Regression
analyses were conducted. Childhood adversities predicted both worse current
psychological functioning (e.g., interpersonal problems), and better
clinician-rated capacities for benefiting from psychotherapy (e.g.
self-reflection, capacity for interaction). Parental problems had the most
numerous negative associations to psychological functioning. Best capacities for 
psychotherapy were predicted by recollected family unhappiness. Associations with
psychiatric criteria were, however, largely non-significant. In conclusion, for
psychosocial treatment planning, patients' early adversities may indicate both
vulnerability and resources. As childhood adversities are frequent among
treatment-seekers, further studies examining how early adversities predict
psychotherapy outcome are needed.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2018.04.011 
PMID: 29677619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Immunol Res. 2018 Feb 18;2018:1454616. doi: 10.1155/2018/1454616. eCollection
2018.

Management of Patients with Graves' Disease and Orbital Involvement: Role of
Spectral Domain Optical Coherence Tomography.

Bruscolini A(1), La Cava M(1), Gharbiya M(1), Sacchetti M(1), Restivo L(1),
Nardella C(1), Marenco M(1), Lambiase A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sense Organs, University Sapienza, Rome, Italy.

Purpose: To investigate the role of choroidal thickness evaluation with spectral 
domain optical coherence tomography (SDOCT) and enhanced depth imaging (EDI)
technique in the management of patients with Graves' disease and orbitopathy
(GO).
Methods: Thirty-six eyes of 18 patients with GO and 36 eyes of 18 age-matched
control subjects were included in this retrospective observational study. All the
subjects underwent a complete ophthalmological evaluation, including clinical
activity score (CAS) and exophthalmometry. The SDOCT images of the choroid were
obtained by EDI modality.
Results: Choroidal thickness was significantly increased in GO than in control
eyes (p < 0.01). A significant correlation was found between choroidal thickness 
and CAS, proptosis, and the duration of disease (p < 0.05).
Conclusion: This study shows that choroidal thickness, evaluated with EDI-OCT, is
significantly increased in patients with GO and correlates with the activity of
the disease, proptosis, and duration of the disease. The choroidal thickening may
reflect the ocular hemodynamic changes, and enhanced depth imaging optical
coherence tomography may be a useful tool for the evaluation of orbital
congestion and management of patients with Graves' disease and orbital
involvement.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/1454616 
PMCID: PMC5835242
PMID: 29670918  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


360. PLoS One. 2018 Apr 18;13(4):e0195890. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0195890.
eCollection 2018.

Using the Normalization Process Theory to qualitatively explore sense-making in
implementation of the Enhanced Recovery After Surgery programme: "It's not rocket
science".

Sutton E(1), Herbert G(1)(2), Burden S(1)(3), Lewis S(1)(4), Thomas S(1)(2), Ness
A(1)(2), Atkinson C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)NIHR Bristol Biomedical Research Centre (Nutrition Theme) at the University
Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust and the University of Bristol, Bristol,
United Kingdom.
(2)Bristol Dental School, University of Bristol, Lower Maudlin Street, Bristol,
United Kingdom.
(3)School of Nursing, Midwifery and Social Work, University of Manchester, Oxford
Road, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(4)Derriford Hospital, Derriford Road, Plymouth, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2018 May 17;13(5):e0197790.

INTRODUCTION: The Enhanced Recovery After Surgery programme (ERAS) is an approach
to the perioperative care of patients encompassing multiple interventions and
involving a wide range of different actors. It can thus be defined as a complex
intervention. Despite the strength of the evidence-base in its support, the
implementation of ERAS has been slow. This paper specifically explores the
utility of Normalization Process Theory (NPT) as a methodological framework to
aid exploration of ERAS implementation, with a focus on the core NPT construct
coherence.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: The study employed qualitative methods guided by NPT.
Semi-structured interviews were conducted with twenty-six healthcare
professionals working in three specialities (thoracic, colorectal, head and neck)
in a UK hospital. Data were analysed using an adapted Framework Approach.
RESULTS: Coherence, or sense-making work, was key to successful implementation
and demonstrated in the importance of participants believing in ERAS both as an
individual and as a team. In order to invest in ERAS individuals needed to be
able to differentiate its practices favourably with those enacted
pre-implementation (differentiation). Participants also needed to understand
their specific tasks and responsibilities (individual specification) and build a 
shared understanding (communal specification), resolving differences in planning 
meetings. Belief in the worth of ERAS was often aligned to evidence for its
effectiveness or benefit to patients (internalization), so implementing ERAS
therefore 'made sense'. Sense-making work had strong links with aspects of
implementation related to other NPT constructs including resource issues such as 
funding for data collection and feedback (reflexive monitoring: systemization)
and failure to replace key staff members (collective action: skill set
workability).
CONCLUSIONS: NPT was found to be a valuable heuristic device to employ in the
exploration of ERAS implementation processes. NPT was useful in facilitating
recognition of the importance of coherence work to successful implementation.
However despite participants' strong beliefs in the worth of ERAS, it was in
translating these beliefs into action that barriers were encountered,
highlighting the interconnectedness of NPT constructs and the complicated nature 
of implementing complex interventions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0195890 
PMCID: PMC5906013
PMID: 29668717 


361. PLoS One. 2018 Apr 17;13(4):e0194906. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0194906.
eCollection 2018.

What matters to women during childbirth: A systematic qualitative review.

Downe S(1), Finlayson K(1), Oladapo OT(2), Bonet M(2), Gülmezoglu AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research in Childbirth and Health (ReaCH) group, University of Central
Lancashire, Preston, United Kingdom.
(2)UNDP/UNFPA/UNICEF/WHO/World Bank Special Programme of Research, Development
and Research Training in Human Reproduction (HRP), Department of Reproductive
Health and Research, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2018 May 17;13(5):e0197791.

INTRODUCTION: Design and provision of good quality maternity care should
incorporate what matters to childbearing women. This qualitative systematic
review was undertaken to inform WHO intrapartum guidelines.
METHODS: Using a pre-determined search strategy, we searched Medline, CINAHL,
PsycINFO, AMED, EMBASE, LILACS, AJOL, and reference lists of eligible studies
published 1996-August 2016 (updated to January 2018), reporting qualitative data 
on womens' childbirth beliefs, expectations, and values. Studies including
specific interventions or health conditions were excluded. PRISMA guidelines were
followed.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Authors' findings were extracted, logged on a
study-specific data form, and synthesised using meta-ethnographic techniques.
Confidence in the quality, coherence, relevance and adequacy of data underpinning
the resulting themes was assessed using GRADE-CERQual. A line of argument
synthesis was developed.
RESULTS: 35 studies (19 countries) were included in the primary search, and 2 in 
the update. Confidence in most results was moderate to high. What mattered to
most women was a positive experience that fulfilled or exceeded their prior
personal and socio-cultural beliefs and expectations. This included giving birth 
to a healthy baby in a clinically and psychologically safe environment with
practical and emotional support from birth companions, and competent, reassuring,
kind clinical staff. Most wanted a physiological labour and birth, while
acknowledging that birth can be unpredictable and frightening, and that they may 
need to 'go with the flow'. If intervention was needed or wanted, women wanted to
retain a sense of personal achievement and control through active
decision-making. These values and expectations were mediated through womens'
embodied (physical and psychosocial) experience of pregnancy and birth; local
familial and sociocultural norms; and encounters with local maternity services
and staff.
CONCLUSIONS: Most healthy childbearing women want a positive birth experience.
Safety and psychosocial wellbeing are equally valued. Maternity care should be
designed to fulfil or exceed womens' personal and socio-cultural beliefs and
expectations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0194906 
PMCID: PMC5903648
PMID: 29664907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Health Promot Int. 2019 Aug 1;34(4):648-657. doi: 10.1093/heapro/day022.

Finnish NGOs promoting health equity in the context of welfare economy.

Rouvinen-Wilenius P(1), Ahokas J(1), Kiukas V(1), Aalto-Kallio M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Finnish Federation for Social Affairs and Health (SOSTE), Yliopistonkatu 5,
00100 Helsinki, Finland.

Health inequality is a national challenge in Finland. The WHO global strategy of 
Health for All implies that all people should have an equal opportunity to
develop and maintain their health through fair and just access to health
resources. This article examines the role of Finnish Non-Governmental
Organizations (NGO) in strengthening the health equity. The article presents the 
strategy and specific criteria constructed by the NGOs to promote health equity
in society. The health equity criteria and welfare economy strategy are combined 
to a framework which NGOs can utilize in their work to promote health equity. The
welfare economy strategy describes the important issues that NGOs have to address
when working towards a specific societal goal, in this case equity. The health
equity criteria in turn are an instrument for the practical implementation of the
preconditions of equity.

© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/day022 
PMID: 29659821  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Psychol. 2018 Jul 4;152(5):276-289. doi: 10.1080/00223980.2018.1447434. Epub
2018 Apr 13.

Does Family Cohesion Predict Children's Effort? The Mediating Roles of Sense of
Coherence, Hope, and Loneliness.

Feldman DB(1), Einav M(2), Margalit M(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Santa Clara University California , USA.
(2)b Peres Academic Center and Tel Aviv - Yaffa Academic College Israel.
(3)c Peres Academic Center and Tel Aviv University Israel.

The degree of cohesion and support within families has often been considered a
predictor of students' effort-investment and success in school. The objectives of
this study are to examine the roles of personal factors (i.e., sense of coherence
and hopeful thinking) as well as interpersonal factors (i.e., loneliness) in
mediating the relationship between family cohesion and effort. The sample
consists of 1719 elementary school children (781 boys and 938 girls) from the
fifth and six grades (mean age = 10.25, SD = 0.70) of 29 elementary schools in
central Israel. Students answered study questionnaires in the middle of their
academic year. Analyses utilizing hierarchical multiple regression and Hayes'
bootstrapping approach (PROCESS; Preacher & Hayes, 2008) were used. The results
support the distinctive contribution of family cohesion and the mediating roles
of sense of coherence and hope (as protective factors) as well as loneliness (as 
a risk factor) in predicting students' school effort. This study has important
educational implications, emphasizing the value of promoting hopeful thinking and
coping with loneliness in helping students to thrive in their studies.

DOI: 10.1080/00223980.2018.1447434 
PMID: 29652639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Glob Health Promot. 2019 Dec;26(4):44-51. doi: 10.1177/1757975918757703. Epub
2018 Apr 11.

Preliminary evaluation of an adolescent positive health measurement scale: a
salutogenic health promotion approach.

Lake DM(1), Rhynders P(2).

Author information: 
(1)East Carolina University, College of Nursing, 3139 Health Sciences,
Greenville, NC, USA.
(2)Trident University International, College of Health Sciences, Anaheim, CA,
USA.

Health measurement tools typically assess indicators of poor health by
identifying the absence, or presence, of disease and risk factors. This article
describes development and validation of the first instrument for measurement of
adolescent engagement in positive health promoting actions from a salutogenic
approach. This cross-sectional study of 406 youths 14-16 years old tested the
validity and reliability of the Salutogenic Wellness Promotion Scale for
Adolescents (SWPS-Adol) and examined the extent to which SWPS-Adol positively
correlated with and was able to predict perceived health among this population.
Findings indicated that SWPS-Adol had good internal consistency (α = 0.84,
subscales α = 0.70), a multi-dimensional structure (physical, emotional, social, 
vocational and spiritual), and was positively correlated with perceived health (r
= 0.37, p < 0.001). The SWPS-Adol total score also showed significant positive
correlations with the physical (p ≤ 0.001), emotional (p < 0.001), social (p <
0.001) and vocational (p < 0.039) dimensions. The more adolescents engaged in
positive behaviors, the better their perceived health. The SWPS-Adol tool
provides positive health data to guide adolescent health programs and health
curricula, to inform health professionals and policy makers about how positive
health actions enhance health and community wellness.

DOI: 10.1177/1757975918757703 
PMID: 29638174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Int Nurs Rev. 2019 Mar;66(1):61-69. doi: 10.1111/inr.12457. Epub 2018 Apr 6.

Investigating nurses' quality of life and work-life balance statuses in
Singapore.

Kowitlawkul Y(1), Yap SF(2), Makabe S(3), Chan S(4), Takagai J(3), Tam WWS(1),
Nurumal MS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Alice Lee Centre for Nursing Studies/Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Advanced Practice Nurse, Khoo Teck Puat Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Department of Clinical Nursing, Akita University, Akita, Japan.
(4)School of Nursing and Midwifery, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, NSW,
Australia.
(5)Kulliyyah of Nursing, International Islamic University Malaysia, Kuantan,
Malaysia.

AIMS: To investigate the key determinants of nurses' quality of life and
work-life balance statuses in a tertiary hospital in Singapore.
BACKGROUND: Nurses' quality of life can directly and indirectly impact patients' 
safety and quality of care. Therefore, identifying key factors that influence
nurses' quality of life is essential in the healthcare delivery system.
METHODS: A descriptive quantitative study design was adopted, and validated
questionnaires were used. Data were collected in a period of 3 months (March to
May 2014) at a 600-bed tertiary hospital in Singapore. One thousand and forty
nurses participated in the study.
RESULTS: Social support and sense of coherence were found to be significant
predictors for high quality of life in all domains. Most nurses in this study
spent more time on work than their private lives. However, there was no
significant difference in job satisfaction among the four groups of nurses'
proportions of percentages of actual time spent on work and private life.
CONCLUSIONS: Cultivating social support from family, friends/colleagues and
supervisors can help an individual cope with stress and enhance a nurse's quality
of life.
IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING POLICY AND PRACTICE: Even though nurses who spent more
time at work were still satisfied with their job, they might need to be aware of 
their physical health and work environment. Nursing policy related to nurses'
physical health and environment should be established. Health promotion
programmes such as physical exercise and mindfulness interventions should be
conducted to promote nurses' well-being and healthy workplace environments to
enhance nurses' quality of life.

© 2018 International Council of Nurses.

DOI: 10.1111/inr.12457 
PMID: 29633267  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Pers Soc Psychol Bull. 2018 Aug;44(8):1228-1241. doi: 10.1177/0146167218764659.
Epub 2018 Apr 9.

The Signs and Significance of Personality Coherence in Personal Stories and
Strivings.

Fournier MA(1), Dong M(1), Quitasol MN(1), Weststrate NM(2), Di Domenico SI(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 University of Toronto Scarborough, Ontario, Canada.
(2)2 University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)3 Australian Catholic University, Strathfield, New South Wales, Australia.

The concept of personality coherence refers to the extent of psychological unity 
and wholeness embodied within each individual. In the present research, we
examined the extent to which the narrative, functional, and organismic
conceptualizations of personality coherence interrelate, as well as their
associations with psychological abilities and personal adjustment. College
students ( N = 391) narrated accounts of three personal memories; listed five
personal strivings that they subsequently compared and evaluated; completed
performance measures of their intelligence, wisdom, and creativity; and rated
their hedonic and eudaimonic well-being. Individuals who coherently organized
their autobiographical memories were protected against feeling pressured or
compelled in their personal strivings and against being steered toward
need-detracting futures. Narrative indicators of coherence were otherwise
independent of the functional and organismic indicators, although all indicators 
of personality coherence correlated with personal adjustment. Wisdom and
creativity predicted narrative coherence, which partially mediated the
associations they demonstrated with eudaimonic well-being.

DOI: 10.1177/0146167218764659 
PMID: 29628004  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Affect Disord. 2018 Aug 1;235:1-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2018.03.010. Epub 2018
Mar 29.

Bipolar disorder and obsessive compulsive disorder: The comorbidity does not
further impair the neurocognitive profile.

de Filippis R(1), Aloi M(1), Bruni A(1), Gaetano R(1), Segura-Garcia C(1), De
Fazio P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Psychiatric Unit, Department of Health Sciences, University Magna Graecia,
Viale Europa, Catanzaro 88100, Italy.
(2)Psychiatric Unit, Department of Health Sciences, University Magna Graecia,
Viale Europa, Catanzaro 88100, Italy. Electronic address: defazio@unicz.it.

BACKGROUND: The comorbidity of bipolar disorder (BD) and obsessive-compulsive
disorder (OCD) has been widely described. Several studies have investigated the
cognitive profiles of BD and OCD patients, but studies that compare BD, BD-OCD,
and OCD patients in neuropsychological domains do not exist. The purpose of this 
study was to compare set-shifting, decision making, and central coherence among
BD, BD-OCD, and OCD patients.
METHODS: A battery of neuropsychological tests was administered to 68 patients
(22 BD, 26 BD-OCD, 20 OCD). The Young Mania Rating Scale and Hamilton Depression 
Rating Scale were used to evaluate manic and depressive symptoms, and OCD
severity was assessed with the Yale Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale.
RESULTS: No significant differences emerged in decision-making and cognitive
flexibility, whereas BD patients had lower scores in the Accuracy Index on
Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure Test and poor response speed on Hayling Sentence
Completion Test Part A than OCD patients.
LIMITATIONS: The small sample size with different BD patients, the
cross-sectional design, and the study clinical nature.
CONCLUSIONS: The most striking result is that, contrary to our hypothesis,
comorbidity does not further impair the neurocognitive profile. The clinical
relevance of our work could be a shift from the current cognitive rehabilitation 
model focusing on individualized pathways towards a new overlapping model for all
three patient groups. This could make the cognitive rehabilitation faster and
less costly. Notwithstanding, these disorders do not only need cognitive training
but also various psycho-educative approaches and treatment according to their
different clinical profile.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2018.03.010 
PMID: 29627704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Qual Life Res. 2018 Jul;27(7):1855-1863. doi: 10.1007/s11136-018-1845-0. Epub
2018 Apr 5.

Coping mediates the relationship between sense of coherence and mental quality of
life in patients with chronic illness: a cross-sectional study.

Kristofferzon ML(1)(2), Engström M(3)(4)(5), Nilsson A(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Caring Sciences, Faculty of Health and Occupational
Studies, University of Gävle, Kungsbäcksvägen 47, 801 76, Gävle, Sweden.
mko@hig.se.
(2)Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden. mko@hig.se.
(3)Department of Health and Caring Sciences, Faculty of Health and Occupational
Studies, University of Gävle, Kungsbäcksvägen 47, 801 76, Gävle, Sweden.
(4)Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
(5)Nursing Department, Medicine and Health College, Lishui University, Lishui,
China.

PURPOSE: The aim of the present study was to investigate relationships between
sense of coherence, emotion-focused coping, problem-focused coping, coping
efficiency, and mental quality of life (QoL) in patients with chronic illness. A 
model based on Lazarus' and Folkman's stress and coping theory tested the
specific hypothesis: Sense of coherence has a direct and indirect effect on
mental QoL mediated by emotion-focused coping, problem-focused coping, and coping
efficiency in serial adjusted for age, gender, educational level, comorbidity,
and economic status.
METHODS: The study used a cross-sectional and correlational design. Patients
(n = 292) with chronic diseases (chronic heart failure, end-stage renal disease, 
multiple sclerosis, stroke, and Parkinson) completed three questionnaires and
provided background data. Data were collected in 2012, and a serial multiple
mediator model was tested using PROCESS macro for SPSS.
RESULTS: The test of the conceptual model confirmed the hypothesis. There was a
significant direct and indirect effect of sense of coherence on mental QoL
through the three mediators. The model explained 39% of the variance in mental
QoL.
CONCLUSIONS: Self-perceived effective coping strategies are the most important
mediating factors between sense of coherence and QoL in patients with chronic
illness, which supports Lazarus' and Folkman's stress and coping theory.

DOI: 10.1007/s11136-018-1845-0 
PMCID: PMC5997720
PMID: 29623597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Dev Psychol. 2018 Jun;54(6):1159-1171. doi: 10.1037/dev0000435. Epub 2018 Apr 5.

Identity and the body: Trajectories of body esteem from adolescence to emerging
adulthood.

Nelson SC(1), Kling J(2), Wängqvist M(2), Frisén A(2), Syed M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities.
(2)Department of Developmental Psychology, University of Gothenburg.

Although Erikson (1968) originally conceptualized identity development as a
process of becoming at home in one's body, little work has been done linking
identity development and research on the body. This study examines how
trajectories of the development of body esteem over time are related to young
people's sense of identity and psychological functioning in a longitudinal sample
from age 10 to 24 (N = 967). Using group-based trajectory modeling, three cubic
subgroups were determined for each of the three types of body esteem: appearance,
weight, and attribution. These groups demonstrated significant variations in the 
ways in which body esteem changes over time. These trajectory groups importantly 
differed in relationship to gender, identity coherence, identity confusion, and
psychological functioning. Results are discussed in terms of the need to use a
sociocultural perspective to explore the body's relation to identity development 
and the importance of disaggregating mean-level findings using person-centered
approaches to determine high-risk groups. (PsycINFO Database Record

(c) 2018 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/dev0000435 
PMID: 29620385  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Front Public Health. 2018 Mar 16;6:64. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2018.00064. eCollection
2018.

Parental Factors Influencing the Development of Early Childhood Caries in
Developing Nations: A Systematic Review.

Rai NK(1), Tiwari T(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Dental Medicine, University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, CO, United States.

Background: Early childhood caries (ECC) is one of the most prevalent and chronic
conditions of childhood. Various factors including biological and dietary factors
along with an overlay of parental social factors have been found to be associated
with the progression of ECC. The objective of this systematic review is to
synthesize available literature and to identify parent-level proximal and distal 
risk factors associated with the development of ECC in developing nations.
Methods: Studies conducted in developing nations, published between 2005 and 2017
in English, that included children younger than 6 years and examined ECC were
included. The outcome of interest were parental risk factors, which included
parental knowledge, behavior, attitudes, sense of coherence (SOC), stress,
socioeconomic status (SES), education, and breastfeeding duration. The studies
were retrieved from MEDLINE, Ovid Medline, and PubMed.
Results: The search yielded 325 studies, of which 18 were considered eligible for
inclusion in this review. Ten studies found maternal education, and seven studies
found parental education to be significantly associated with ECC. SES was
significantly associated with ECC in 13 studies in the form of annual household
income and occupation level. Four studies observed the significant association
between oral health knowledge and attitudes with ECC, whereas only two studies
found maternal attitude to be associated with ECC. Breastfeeding duration was a
significant risk factor in four studies. One study each found significant
associations of SOC, parental distress, and secondary smoke with ECC.
Conclusion: To date, most of the researches done in developing countries have
reported distal parental factors such as income and education being significant
risk factors in caries development compared to proximal risk factors in
low-income groups. Only a few studies analyzed the psychosocial and behavioral
factors. Interventions could be designed to improve parental oral health
knowledge and behaviors in these nations.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2018.00064 
PMCID: PMC5865069
PMID: 29616206 


371. BMC Psychol. 2018 Apr 3;6(1):12. doi: 10.1186/s40359-018-0223-6.

Promoting psychosocial well-being following stroke: study protocol for a
randomized, controlled trial.

Kirkevold M(1), Kildal Bragstad L(2), Bronken BA(3), Kvigne K(3), Martinsen R(3),
Gabrielsen Hjelle E(2), Kitzmüller G(4), Mangset M(5), Angel S(6), Aadal L(7),
Eriksen S(8), Wyller TB(9), Sveen U(10).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health and Society and Research Center for habilitation and
rehabilitation services and models (CHARM), University of Oslo, P.O.Box 1130,
Blindern, 0318, Oslo, Norway. marit.kirkevold@medisin.uio.no.
(2)Institute of Health and Society and Research Center for habilitation and
rehabilitation services and models (CHARM), University of Oslo, P.O.Box 1130,
Blindern, 0318, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Inland Norway University of Applied Sciences, P.O.Box 400, 2418, Elverum,
Norway.
(4)Faculty of Health UIT, The Arctic University of Norway, Campus, Narvik,
Norway.
(5)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, P.O box 4956,
Nydalen, 0424, Oslo, Norway.
(6)Institute of Public Health, Aarhus University, Hoegh-Guldbergs Gade 6 A, 8000,
Aarhus, Denmark.
(7)Hammel Neurorehabilitation and Research Centre, Voldbyvej 15 8450, Hammel,
Denmark.
(8)Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Ageing and Health (Ageing and Health), P. 
O. Box 2136, 3103, Tønsberg, Norway.
(9)Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, and Department. of
Geriatric Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, P.O box 4956 Nydalen, 0424, Oslo,
Norway.
(10)Dept. of Geriatric Medicine, and Dept. of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, Oslo University Hospital, P.O box 4956 Nydalen, 0424, Oslo,
Norway.

BACKGROUND: Stroke is a major public health threat globally. Psychosocial
well-being may be affected following stroke. Depressive symptoms, anxiety,
general psychological distress and social isolation are prevalent. Approximately 
one third report depressive symptoms and 20% report anxiety during the first
months or years after the stroke. Psychosocial difficulties may impact
significantly on long-term functioning and quality of life, reduce the effects of
rehabilitation services and lead to higher mortality rates. The aim of the study 
is to evaluate the effect of a previously developed and feasibility tested
dialogue-based psychosocial intervention aimed at promoting psychosocial
well-being and coping following stroke among stroke survivors with and without
aphasia.
METHODS: The study will be conducted as a multicenter, randomized, single blind
controlled trial with one intervention and one control arm. It will include a
total of 330 stroke survivors randomly allocated into either an intervention
group (dialogue-based intervention to promote psychosocial well-being) or a
control group (usual care). Participants in the intervention group will receive
eight individual sessions of supported dialogues in their homes during the first 
six months following an acute stroke. The primary outcome measure will be
psychosocial well-being measured by the General Health Questionnaire (GHQ).
Secondary outcome measures will be quality of life (SAQoL), sense of coherence
(SOC), and depression (Yale). Process evaluation will be conducted in a
longitudinal mixed methods study by individual qualitative interviews with 15-20 
participants in the intervention and control groups, focus group interviews with 
the intervention personnel and data collectors, and a comprehensive analysis of
implementation fidelity.
DISCUSSION: The intervention described in this study protocol is based on
thorough development and feasibility work, guided by the UK medical research
council framework for developing and testing complex interventions. It combines
classical effectiveness evaluation with a thorough process evaluation. The
results from this study may inform the development of further trials aimed at
promoting psychosocial well-being following stroke as well as inform the
psychosocial follow up of stroke patients living at home.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT02338869 ; registered 10/04/2014 (On-going trial).

DOI: 10.1186/s40359-018-0223-6 
PMCID: PMC5883408
PMID: 29615136  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Intensive Crit Care Nurs. 2018 Aug;47:39-45. doi: 10.1016/j.iccn.2018.03.002.
Epub 2018 Mar 30.

Recovery programme for ICU survivors has no effect on relatives' quality of life:
Secondary analysis of the RAPIT-study.

Bohart S(1), Egerod I(2), Bestle MH(3), Overgaard D(4), Christensen DF(5), Jensen
JF(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen,
Herlev Ringvej 75, 2730 Herlev, Denmark. Electronic address:
soes.bohart@regionh.dk.
(2)Health & Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, and Intensive Care Unit
4131, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen,
Denmark. Electronic address: Ingrid.egerod@regionh.dk.
(3)Nordsjællands Hospital, Dyrehavevej 29, 3400 Hillerød, Denmark. Electronic
address: morten.bestle@regionh.dk.
(4)Institution of Nursing, Metropolitan University College, Tagensvej 86, 2200
Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address: doov@phmetropol.dk.
(5)Nordsjællands Hospital, Dyrehavevej 29, 3400 Hillerød, Denmark.
(6)Department of Anesthesiology, Holbæk Hospital, Smedelundsgade 60, 4300 Holbæk 
and Nordsjællands Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Dyrehavevej 29, 3400
Hilleroed, Denmark. Electronic address: jfje@regionsjaelland.dk.

BACKGROUND: Relatives of intensive care patients are at risk of developing
symptoms of anxiety, depression and posttraumatic stress resulting in reduced
health-related quality of life. Recovery programmes for patients have been
implemented, but their effect on relatives is uncertain.
AIM: To determine whether relatives benefit from a recovery programme intended
for intensive care survivors.
RESEARCH DESIGN: A randomised controlled trial of 181 adult relatives:
intervention group (n = 87), control group (n = 94).
SETTING: Ten intensive care units in Denmark.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Primary outcome: health-related quality of life (HRQOL).
SECONDARY OUTCOMES: Sense of coherence (SOC), and symptoms of anxiety, depression
and posttraumatic stress, compared to standard care at 12 months after intensive 
care discharge.
RESULTS: No difference in HRQOL between groups was observed at 12 months (mean
difference in mental component summary score, 1.35 [CI 95%: -3.13; 5.82],
p = 0.55; and physical component summery score, 1.86 [CI 95%: -1.88; 5.59],
p = 0.33). No differences were found in secondary outcomes.
CONCLUSION: The recovery programme intended for intensive care survivors did not 
have an effect on the relatives. Future recovery programmes should be targeted to
help both patient and family, and future research should be conducted on a larger
scale to make conclusions with higher probability.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.iccn.2018.03.002 
PMID: 29606480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Int J Nurs Knowl. 2019 Apr;30(2):106-113. doi: 10.1111/2047-3095.12207. Epub 2018
Mar 30.

Maintenance of Continuity in Older Adulthood: Concept Analysis.

Lim S(1), Song JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)College of Nursing, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: This article aims to define the concept of maintenance of continuity in 
older adulthood (MCOA) and assist nurses to better understand the concept of
MCOA.
METHODS: The method by Walker and Avant was used for this concept analysis.
FINDINGS: In the literature, MCOA is defined as a psychosocial adaptation
strategy by searching for preference and familiarity, making a sense of
connection, and creating coherence.
CONCLUSIONS: MCOA has potential to improve psychosocial adjustment to difficult
life transitions as a coping mechanism.
IMPLICATION FOR NURSING PRACTICE: Insights about MCOA in nursing may contribute
to improved patient care outcomes by assisting nurses to understand the elderly's
experience during age-related challenges from a life course perspective.

© 2018 NANDA International, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/2047-3095.12207 
PMID: 29601148  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Nurs Manag. 2018 Nov;26(8):1015-1023. doi: 10.1111/jonm.12628. Epub 2018 Mar
30.

Effect of an experiential learning-based programme to foster competence among
nurse managers.

Kuraoka Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Nursing Science, St Luke's International University, Tokyo,
Japan.

AIM: The present study aimed to examine the effect of providing an experiential
learning-based programme to foster competence among nurse managers in the early
years of their supervisory roles.
BACKGROUND: Nurse managers take supervisory positions without being sufficiently 
prepared for the task and therefore often experience difficultly in the early
years of managerial roles. They need support from their supervisor and require
opportunities for development.
METHODS: We developed an experiential learning-based programme for nurse managers
in the first 3 years of a supervisory role. Sixty-three nurse managers and their 
supervisors were enrolled. The programme was evaluated using a one-group
pretest-posttest design. The outcome measures were experiential learning,
knowledge, social support, competency as a nurse manager, and sense of coherence.
Outcomes were compared using paired t tests.
RESULTS: Nurse managers showed significantly improved experiential learning
(p = .001), knowledge (p < .001) and competence as a nurse manager (p = .002)
after participating in this programme.
CONCLUSION: This programme increased knowledge, promoted experiential learning,
and improved competence among nurse managers.
IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING MANAGEMENT: This experiential learning-based programme
for nurse managers in the early years of a supervisory role fostered competence
among nurse managers.

© 2018 The Authors. Journal of Nursing Management Published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jonm.12628 
PMID: 29600822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Mil Med. 2018 Jul 1;183(7-8):e261-e269. doi: 10.1093/milmed/usy021.

Assessing Psychological Fitness in the Military - Development of an Effective and
Economic Screening Instrument.

Wesemann U(1), Willmund GD(1), Ungerer J(1), Kreim G(2), Zimmermann PL(1), Bühler
A(1), Stein M(3), Kaiser J(1), Kowalski JT(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychotraumatology, Bundeswehr
Hospital, Scharnhorststr. 13, Berlin, Germany.
(2)German Armed Forces Office, Department P III 5, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Experimental Psychological Unit, Helmut Schmidt University/University of the
Federal Armed Forces, Holstenhofweg 85, Hamburg, Germany.

Background: There are a high number of soldiers with deployment-related and
non-deployment-related mental health problems in the German Armed Forces
(Bundeswehr): This has led to an increase in mental disorders and a decrease in
quality of life. To tackle these problems and to strengthen resources among the
Bundeswehr personnel, this study aims at developing a screening instrument for
assessing the psychological fitness of soldiers on the basis of questionnaire
scales. In this approach, psychological fitness describes a soldier's ability to 
integrate and enhance his/her mental and emotional capabilities using resources
and trainable skills.
Methods: Bundeswehr combat soldiers (N = 361) answered questionnaires about
resilience (RS-11), sense of coherence (SOC-L9), quality of life (WHOQOL-BREF),
mental disorders (PHQ-D) and post-traumatic growth (PTG). Additionally, they were
interviewed by trained troop psychologists both before and after their deployment
in Afghanistan from January to June 2014. The screening model is based on
self-report data; the psychological fitness in the standardized interview serves 
as a validation standard.
Findings: A linear logistic regression model was performed that includes the
social relationship and the psychological scale from WHOQOL-BREF and the
somatoform and the stress scale from PHQ. This model allows specialists a first
assessment between participants who are psychologically fit before and after
deployment and those who are less so. The chosen cutoff for sensitivity is
between 70% and 79% and for specificity between 70% and 85%.
Discussion: This screening approach is still not applicable to large populations 
like that of the Bundeswehr, which currently has about 170,000 soldiers but it is
limited to deployed combat troops. Classifying psychological fitness allows
specialists to differentiate between people in need of special training or
additional diagnostic measures and those in need of sustaining their fitness
regularly at the earliest possible stage. A follow-up study that is
representative of deployed and non-deployed military personnel will examine
whether these results can be transferred to the entire Bundeswehr and whether the
validity of the interview can be established.

DOI: 10.1093/milmed/usy021 
PMID: 29596663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Nagoya J Med Sci. 2018 Feb;80(1):61-71. doi: 10.18999/nagjms.80.1.61.

Factors related to sense of coherence in adult patients with Type 2 diabetes.

Odajima Y(1), Sumi N(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, Nagoya City University, Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Department of Fundamental Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

The influence of a diabetic person's sense of burden and blood sugar control
through sense of coherence (SOC) on self-management has yet to be sufficiently
clarified. The purpose of this study was to examine the utility of salutogenesis,
which has sense of coherence at its core, for the self-management of patients
with type 2 diabetes. A total of 258 questionnaires were distributed to patients 
who were seen at one of three hospitals in an urban area in Japan, after
obtaining consent from the patient. They were between 20 and 75 years old and
regularly received care. Of the 185 responses, 177 were valid. The responses were
analyzed by referring to the framework of salutogenesis, and the relationship
between patient characteristics, SOC, the Problem Areas In Diabetes survey
(PAID), and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) were studied with structural equation
modeling (SEM). SOC had a main effect on PAID scores and an indirect effect on
HbA1c. Moreover, age influenced SOC positively. The SOC of patients with type 2
diabetes in the present study was comparatively high. These observations suggest 
a direct effect of SOC on reducing the sense of burden from having diabetes and
an indirect effect on decreasing HbA1c. This research suggested the possibility
that diabetes can be controlled by improving SOC.

DOI: 10.18999/nagjms.80.1.61 
PMCID: PMC5857502
PMID: 29581615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Health Promot Int. 2019 Jun 1;34(3):541-551. doi: 10.1093/heapro/day012.

Reorienting Norwegian mental healthcare services: listen to patients' learning
appetite.

Mjøsund NH(1), Eriksson M(2), Espnes GA(3), Vinje HF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Health Research and Development, Vestre Viken Hospital
Trust, Drammen, Norway.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, Center on Salutogenesis, University West,
Trollhättan, Sweden.
(3)NTNU Center for Health Promotion Research, Department of Public Health and
Nursing, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
(4)Department of Health, Social and Welfare Studies, Faculty of Health and Social
Sciences, University College of Southeast Norway, Kongsberg, Norway.

Reorientation of healthcare services towards more efficient health promotion
interventions is an urgent matter. Despite policies and guidelines being in
place, it is the least developed key action area of the Ottawa charter. User
involvement, or the voice of the patient, is missing from the knowledge base of
health promotion in the mental healthcare services. The aim of this study was to 
add experiential knowledge from former patients. We explored the lived experience
of 12 former inpatients at a mental healthcare hospital. We describe what they
perceive as mental health promoting efforts. A salutogenic theoretical framework 
and the methodology of interpretative phenomenological analysis were used. The
analysis revealed an appetite for learning in order to develop an in depth
understanding of their former experiences. This was motivated by a desire to
master daily life despite living with an illness and to increase health and
well-being. The participants perceived the learning processes within the
healthcare setting as mental health promoting. This craving for a better life is 
compatible with health promotion. It may turn out to be an opportunity to
complement the curative activity of healthcare services with health promotion
educational activities.

© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/day012 
PMID: 29579203  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Scand J Caring Sci. 2018 Dec;32(4):1279-1287. doi: 10.1111/scs.12569. Epub 2018
Mar 26.

Psychometric properties of the suffering assessment questionnaire in adults with 
chronic diseases or life-threatening illness.

Encarnação P(1)(2), Oliveira CC(3), Martins T(4).

Author information: 
(1)ICBAS (Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas de Abel Salazar), University of Porto,
Porto, Portugal.
(2)School of Nursing, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal.
(3)University of Minho (CEHUM), Braga, Portugal.
(4)Escola Superior de Enfermagem do Porto (Nursing School of Porto), Porto,
Portugal and CINTESIS (CINTESIS - Center for Health Technology and Services
Research).

BACKGROUND: Suffering has been considered by many authors to be a difficult
concept to assess and measure, as it is subjective and unique. However, to guide 
the diagnosis and decision-making of healthcare professionals, it is important to
develop an instrument that differentiates the different suffering dimensions,
namely, intra- and interpersonal suffering, awareness of suffering and spiritual 
suffering.
AIM: The aim of this study was thus to design and validate an instrument for the 
assessment of the dimensions of suffering in adult patients with chronic diseases
or life-threatening illnesses.
METHOD: A methodological study was developed. The data were collected from two
self-help organisations and a palliative care unit. The theoretical model was
tested using confirmatory factor analysis. The study sample consisted of 251
patients with chronic diseases or life-threatening illnesses. The Sense of
Coherence Scale, the Spiritual Assessment Scale and the Suffering Assessment
Questionnaire in Adults with Chronic Diseases or Life-Threatening Illness (SAQ)
were applied to each participant and were later returned for analysis.
RESULTS: An SAQ version with 12 items showed adequate psychometric
characteristics of validity and internal consistency after being adapted to a
four-dimensional structure that assesses the four dimensions of suffering.
CONCLUSION: The results of confirmatory analysis indicated a good model fit that 
suggested that the advocated theoretical model is plausible.

© 2018 Nordic College of Caring Science.

DOI: 10.1111/scs.12569 
PMID: 29578241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Psychol Rep. 2019 Apr;122(2):731-747. doi: 10.1177/0033294118765420. Epub 2018
Mar 20.

Cross-Cultural Evaluation of Antonovsky's Orientation to Life Questionnaire:
Comparison Between Australian, Finnish, and Turkish Young Adults.

Lajunen T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.

Antonovsky's concept "sense of coherence" (SOC) and the related measurement
instrument "The Orientation to Life Questionnaire" (OLQ) has been widely applied 
in studies on health and well-being. The purpose of the present study is to
investigate the cultural differences in factor structures and psychometric
properties as well as mean scores of the 13-item form of Antonovsky's OLQ among
Australian (n = 201), Finnish (n = 203), and Turkish (n = 152) students. Three
models of factor structure were studied by using confirmatory factor analysis:
single-factor model, first-order correlated-three-factor model, and the
second-order three-factor model. Results obtained in all three countries suggest 
that the first- and second-order three-factor models fitted the data better that 
the single-factor model. Hence, the OLQ scoring based on comprehensibility,
manageability, and meaningfulness scales was supported. Scale reliabilities and
inter-correlations were in line with those reported in earlier studies. Two-way
analyses of variance (gender × nationality) with age as a covariate showed no
cultural differences in SOC scale scores. Women got higher scores on the
meaningfulness scale than men, and age was positively related to all SOC scale
scores indicating that SOC increases in early adulthood. The results support the 
three-factor model of OLQ which thus should be used in Australia, Finland, and
Turkey instead of a single-factor model. Need for cross-cultural studies taking
into account cultural correlates of SOC and its relation to health and well-being
indicators as well as studies on gender differences in the OLQ are emphasized.

DOI: 10.1177/0033294118765420 
PMID: 29558867  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Anxiety Stress Coping. 2018 Jul;31(4):475-485. doi:
10.1080/10615806.2018.1454070. Epub 2018 Mar 20.

Sense of coherence, hope, and home demolition are differentially associated with 
anger and anxiety among Bedouin Arab adolescents in recognized and unrecognized
villages.

Al-Said H(1), Braun-Lewensohn O(1), Sagy S(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Conflict Management & Conflict Resolution Program, Department of
Interdisciplinary Studies , Ben-Gurion University , Beer Sheva , Israel.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: This research investigated how coping resources
explain emotional reactions of anger and anxiety, in the context of threat of
house demolition, among adolescents in three groups: Adolescents living in a
recognized village with no demolition, adolescents living in an unrecognized
village (by the Israeli government as legal) with no demolition, and adolescents 
living in an unrecognized village with demolition. The framework of this research
is based on Antonovsky's salutogenic theory, which suggests examining ability to 
cope with stressful situations.
DESIGN: Multi-group cross-sectional study.
METHODS: The study was carried out during 2010-2011 and included 910
participants, of whom 411 adolescents lived in unrecognized villages where 193 of
them experienced home demolition. Participants filled out a questionnaire
including demographics, coping resources and emotional reactions.
RESULTS: Findings showed that stress reactions were the highest among adolescents
from unrecognized villages with demolition. Personal sense of coherence (SOC) was
related to fewer emotional reactions among the adolescents from recognized
villages; among adolescents from unrecognized villages, especially adolescents
living in an unrecognized village with demolition, a stronger SOC was linked to
stronger emotional reactions.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings have important implications for understanding the
role of coping among youth from different cultural groups.

DOI: 10.1080/10615806.2018.1454070 
PMID: 29557192  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Psychol Med. 2019 Jan;49(1):121-131. doi: 10.1017/S0033291718000582. Epub 2018
Mar 20.

The association of psychological factors and healthcare use with the discrepancy 
between subjective and objective respiratory-health complaints in the general
population.

Selinheimo S(1), Vasankari T(2), Jokela M(3), Kanervisto M(4), Pirkola S(5),
Suvisaari J(6), Paunio T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Finnish Institute of Occupational Health,Helsinki,Finland.
(2)Finnish Lung Health Association,Helsinki,Finland.
(3)Department of Psychology and Logopedics,Faculty of Medicine,University of
Helsinki,Helsinki,Finland.
(4)Independent Science Researcher Ylöjärvi,Finland.
(5)Health Sciences, andUniversity Hospital Psychiatric Department,University of
Tampere,Tampere,Finland.
(6)Department of Health,National Institute for Health and
Welfare,Helsinki,Finland.

BACKGROUND: We examined the prevalence of self-perceived respiratory symptoms
(SRS) in the absence of any objective findings of respiratory pathology, and the 
association of such prevalence with psychological factors and healthcare use in
the general population.
METHODS: The study was conducted among a nationally representative sample of
Finnish adults (BRIF8901). Respiratory functioning was measured by a spirometry
test. Structured questionnaires were used to measure SRS, physician visits and
psychological factors of alexithymia, sense of coherence, illness worry and
common mental disorders. Individuals with a diagnosed respiratory disease or a
severe psychiatric disorder, determined in a diagnostic interview, were excluded,
giving a sample comprising 4544 participants.
RESULTS: Twenty-six per cent of the general population and 36% of those with no
diagnosed severe psychiatric disorder or respiratory disease experienced SRS
despite a normal spirometry result. Psychological factors were associated with
SRS (0.0001 &lt; p &lt; 0.032), and on the number of physician visit explaining
42.7% of the difference in visits between individuals with and without SRS,
respectively. Illness worry was associated most strongly with SRS [odds ratio
(OR) 1.29, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.19-1.41, p &lt; 0.0001] and higher
numbers of physician visits (OR 1.35, CI 1.32-1.38, p &lt; 0.00001), even after
several adjustments.
CONCLUSIONS: Respiratory symptoms without objective findings are common in the
general population. The study results underline the role of psychological factors
in the reporting of respiratory symptoms and the associated medical burden,
thereby indicating the functional nature of the symptomatology.

DOI: 10.1017/S0033291718000582 
PMID: 29554990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Vis Exp. 2018 Feb 12;(132). doi: 10.3791/56469.

Regenerative Therapy by Suprachoroidal Cell Autograft in Dry Age-related Macular 
Degeneration: Preliminary In Vivo Report.

Limoli PG(1), Vingolo EM(2), Limoli C(1), Scalinci SZ(3), Nebbioso M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Low Vision Research Centre of Milan.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, A. Fiorini Hospital, Sapienza University of Rome.
(3)Glaucoma and Low Vision Study Center, Department of General Surgery and Organ 
Transplants, University of Bologna.
(4)Department of Sense Organs, Faculty of Medicine and Odontology, Sapienza
University of Rome; marcella.nebbioso@uniroma1.it.

This study is aimed at examining whether a suprachoroidal graft of autologous
cells can improve best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and responses to
microperimetry (MY) in eyes affected by dry Age-related Macular Degeneration
(AMD) over time through the production and secretion of growth factors (GFs) on
surrounding tissue. Patients were randomly assigned to each study group. All
patients were diagnosed with dry AMD and with BCVA equal to or greater than 1
logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution (logMAR). A suprachoroidal
autologous graft by Limoli Retinal Restoration Technique (LRRT) was carried out
on group A, which included 11 eyes from 11 patients. The technique was performed 
by implanting adipocytes, adipose-derived stem cells obtained from the stromal
vascular fraction, and platelets from platelet-rich plasma in the suprachoroidal 
space. Conversely, group B, including 14 eyes of 14 patients, was used as a
control group. For each patient, diagnosis was verified by confocal scanning
laser ophthalmoscope and spectral domain-optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT).
In group A, BCVA improved by 0.581 to 0.504 at 90 days and to 0.376 logMAR at 180
days (+32.20%) postoperatively. Furthermore, MY test increased by 11.44 dB to
12.59 dB at 180 days. The different cell types grafted behind the choroid were
able to ensure constant GF secretion in the choroidal flow. Consequently, the
results indicate that visual acuity (VA) in the grafted group can increase more
than in the control group after six months.

DOI: 10.3791/56469 
PMCID: PMC5912396
PMID: 29553543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J UOEH. 2018;40(1):53-63. doi: 10.7888/juoeh.40.53.

[Stressors and the Sense of Coherence Related to the Mental Health of Nurses
Assuming the Roles of Wives and/or Mothers - Investigation into the Effects of
Leaving Jobs Because of Marriage, Childbirth, and Childrearing].

[Article in Japanese]

Okada N(1), Nakata A(2), Nakano M(3), Sakai K(4), Takai K(5), Kodama H(1),
Kobayashi T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Nursing Science and Arts, School of Health Sciences, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Japan.
(2)Occupational and Community Health Nursing, School of Health Sciences,
University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Japan.
(3)Department of Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences, Junshin Gakuen University.
(4)Nursing Course Department of Health Science, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University.
(5)Faculty of Nursing, Sanyo Gakuen University.
(6)Laboratory of Health Promotion and Developmental Science, Graduate School of
Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University.

Many female nurses leave their jobs because of major life events. However, the
mental health status and related factors among nurses who assume the roles of
wives and/or mothers have been insufficiently examined. Therefore we examined the
mental health levels and related factors among such nurse. We conducted a
questionnaire survey on 763 female nurses working at general hospitals with over 
200 beds in Fukuoka Prefecture. Of 402 responses, 108 were divided into two
groups: nurses who had left because of marriage, childbirth, or childrearing
(leaving group), and those who had not (non-leaving group). The following were
assessed: work satisfaction level, the Brief Job Stress Questionnaire, The
General Health Questionnaire (GHQ) 28, and the Sense of Coherence (SOC) scale.
Results showed that nurses who had assumed the roles of wives and/or mothers had 
lower mental health status than general women, and nurses who retained their jobs
had higher mental health status and sense of comprehensibility on the SOC scale
than those who left. Multiple regression analyses using the total GHQ score as an
objective variable showed that only the sense of comprehensibility on the SOC
scale correlated with mental health status in the non-leaving group. For the
leaving group, having support, high work and life satisfaction levels, and
several work stressors were correlated. These findings strongly suggest that to
maintain and improve the mental health of nurses who assume the role of wives
and/or mothers, greater support, higher satisfaction, reduced stressors, and
maintenance and improvement of the sense of comprehensibility are required.

DOI: 10.7888/juoeh.40.53 
PMID: 29553075  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Scand J Public Health. 2018 Feb;46(20_suppl):94-98. doi:
10.1177/1403494817743902.

Workshop salutogenesis and the future of health promotion and public health.

Lindström B.

This presentation is a synthesis of a workshop on Salutogenesis and the Future of
Health Promotion and Public Health at the Nordic Health Promotion Research
Conference in June 2016. A brief historical review of Public Health and Health
Promotion development in a Nordic perspective is included. However, the main
thrust of the article is to present how the salutogenic theory and approach could
strengthen society's organised efforts to prevent disease, promote health and
prolong life. A critical view based on existing evidence is maintained through
the presentation that arrives at the conclusion it would be worthwhile to invest 
in effective theory driven approaches to the development of Public Health and
Health Promotion in the future.

DOI: 10.1177/1403494817743902 
PMID: 29552971  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Community Ment Health J. 2018 Nov;54(8):1228-1238. doi:
10.1007/s10597-018-0263-7. Epub 2018 Mar 16.

Risk Factors as Major Determinants of Resilience: A Replication Study.

Eshel Y(1), Kimhi S(2), Lahad M(2), Leykin D(2), Goroshit M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Tel Hai College, Qiryat Shemona, Israel.
yeshel@psy.haifa.ac.il.
(2)Department of Psychology, Tel Hai College, Qiryat Shemona, Israel.

The present study was conducted in the context of current concerns about
replication in psychological research. It claims that risk factors should be
regarded as an integral part of the definition of individual resilience, which
should be defined in terms of the balance between individual strength or
protective factors, and individual vulnerability or risk factors (IND-SVR). Five 
independent samples, including 3457 Israeli participants, were employed to
determine the effects of resilience promoting and resilience suppressing
variables on the IND-SVR index of resilience, and on its two components: recovery
from adversity, and distress symptoms. Five path analyses were employed for
determining the role of distress symptoms as a measure of psychological
resilience, as compared to other indices of this resilience. Results indicated
the major role of risk factors (distress symptoms) as an integral component of
resilience. This role was generally replicated in the five investigated samples. 
Risk factors are legitimate, valid, and useful parts of the definition of
psychological resilience. Resilience research has shifted away from studying
individual risk factors to investigating the process through which individuals
overcome the hardships they experience. The present data seem to suggest that
this shift should be reexamined.

DOI: 10.1007/s10597-018-0263-7 
PMID: 29549544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


386. P R Health Sci J. 2018 Mar;37(1):32-38.

Lifetime Traumatic Experiences and Leisure Physical Inactivity among Adolescent
Boys.

Malinauskas R(1), Malinauskiene V(2), Malinauskas M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Lithuanian Sports University, Department of Health, Physical and Social
Education, Kaunas, Lithuania.
(2)Lithuanian Sports University, Department of Health, Physical and Social
Education, Kaunas, Lithuania; Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Academy
of Medicine, Department of Population studies, Kaunas, Lithuania.
(3)Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Academy of Medicine, Department of
Population studies, Kaunas, Lithuania.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to examine the associations between lifetime
traumatic experiences and leisure physical inactivity among adolescent boys and
to determine to what extent those associations are mediated by posttraumatic
stress symptoms, unhealthy behaviors (smoking, alcohol use), the daily
consumption of fresh fruit, and sense of coherence.
METHODS: A self-administered questionnaire combining 3 instruments measured
leisure physical activity level (Godin and Shephard), symptoms of posttraumatic
stress (IES-revised), lifetime traumatic experiences, sense of coherence (SOC-13,
from Antonovsky), and behavioral and dietary patterns in a representative sample 
of eighth grade boys from a number of Kaunas, Lithuania, secondary schools (N =
885; response rate 88.6%).
RESULTS: Fifty-six point eight percent of boys had experienced at least 1
lifetime traumatic event, with a 20.5% prevalence of PTS symptoms, and 5.4% were 
inactive during leisure time. In the logistic regression models, leisure physical
inactivity was associated with lifetime traumatic experiences (adjusted OR =
2.33; 95% CI: 1.09-4.98). Sense of coherence and posttraumatic stress symptoms
did not mediate those associations. Less-than-daily consumption of fresh fruit
showed an independent effect, while smoking and weekly consumption of alcohol did
not.
CONCLUSION: Consistent associations between lifetime traumatic experiences and
leisure physical inactivity among adolescent boys indicate that the presence of
lifetime traumatic events should be taken into account when employing
intervention and prevention programs on unhealthy lifestyles (physical
inactivity, smoking, and alcohol).


PMID: 29547682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2018 Jan-Feb;22(1):169-172. doi:
10.4103/ijem.IJEM_224_17.

Salutogenesis in Type 2 Diabetes Care: A Biopsychosocial Perspective.

Kalra S(1), Baruah MP(2), Sahay R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Bharti Hospital, Karnal, Haryana, India.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Excel Hospitals, Guwahati, Assam, India.
(3)Departmen of Endocrinology, Osmania Medical College, Hyderabad, Telangana,
India.

Type 2 diabetes has emerged as a major threat to global public health. In spite
of best efforts by health care professionals, persons with diabetes, and the
community at large, remain unsatisfied with the approach to diabetes management. 
This brief communication utilizes Antonovsky's concept of salutogenesis, to
suggest a person friendly and community friendly framework for diabetes care.
Salutogenesis is used as a means of studying the biopsychosocial domains of
diabetes, and as a guiding principle for health related communication. Adoption
of a salutogenic approach to diabetes care should help improve outcomes and
satisfaction with health care.

DOI: 10.4103/ijem.IJEM_224_17 
PMCID: PMC5838900
PMID: 29535957 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


388. Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2018 Jan-Feb;22(1):164-166. doi:
10.4103/ijem.IJEM_266_17.

Metformin + Sodium-glucose Co-transporter-2 Inhibitor: Salutogenic Lifestyle
Mimetics in a Tablet?

Kalra S(1), Jacob J(2), Baruah MP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Bharti Hospital, Karnal, Haryana, India.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Christian Medical College, Ludhiana, Punjab,
India.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Excel Hospitals, Guwahati, Assam, India.

Salutogenesis is an accepted approach for chronic disease management. Calorie
restriction and exercise are two evidence based salutogenic interventions in
diabetes treatment. Calorie restriction mimetics and exercise mimetics may be
used as pharmacological tools to help manage diabetes in a sulutogenic manner.
This article discusses the biochemical basis and pharmacology of metformin and
sodium glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors. It describes how a combination of
these drugs can be used as a calories restriction and exercise mimetic, to help
improve diabetes control.

DOI: 10.4103/ijem.IJEM_266_17 
PMCID: PMC5838898
PMID: 29535955 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


389. Qual Life Res. 2018 Aug;27(8):1973-1983. doi: 10.1007/s11136-018-1832-5. Epub
2018 Mar 12.

Influence of sense of coherence on oral health-related quality of life: a
systematic review.

Gomes MC(1), Dutra LC(1), Costa EMMB(1), Paiva SM(2), Granville-Garcia AF(3),
Martins CC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate Program in Dentistry, State University of Paraíba-UEPB, 1325/410 
Capitão João Alves de Lira, Campina Grande, PB, 58428-800, Brazil.
(2)Department of Pediatric Dentistry and Orthodontic, Federal University of Minas
Gerais-UFMG, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(3)Postgraduate Program in Dentistry, State University of Paraíba-UEPB, 1325/410 
Capitão João Alves de Lira, Campina Grande, PB, 58428-800, Brazil.
anaflaviagg@hotmail.com.

PURPOSE: The aim of the present study was to perform a systematic review of the
literature for scientific evidence regarding the association between a sense of
coherence (SOC) and oral health-related of quality of life (OHRQoL).
METHODS: Electronic searches were performed in five databases. Manual searches
were also performed. To be included, studies needed to address the relationship
between SOC and OHRQoL. The risk of bias was evaluated using the Newcastle-Ottawa
scales for cross-sectional and cohort studies and the Physiotherapy Evidence
Database scale for clinical trials.
RESULTS: Seven cross-sectional studies, four cohort studies, and one clinical
trial were included in the present review. Two independent reviewers selected the
studies, extracted that data, and performed the evaluations of methodological
quality based on the standardized scales. The majority of authors found a
significant association between a weak SOC and greater impact on OHRQoL, but some
methodological flaws were found in the execution of the studies.
CONCLUSION: Based on the analysis of the studies included in the present
systematic review, there is scientific evidence that a sense of coherence exerts 
an influence on oral health-related quality of life, but further population-based
studies are needed to confirm such evidence.

DOI: 10.1007/s11136-018-1832-5 
PMID: 29532319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Rev Med Brux. 2018;39(1):22-28. doi: 10.30637/2018.17-050.

[Perspectives on resilience : trait or aptitude ?]

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Rolin H(1), Fossion P(1), Kotsou I(2), Leys C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Service de Psychiatrie, C.H.U. Brugmann.
(2)Faculté de Psychologie, ULB.

In this paper, we discuss various issues related to the concept of resilience,
which is conventionally defined as a dynamic process allowing for a positive
adaptation in a context of significant adversity. First, we try to draw the
reader's attention to the importance of the concept of resilience in terms of
public health. Second, we address the difficulty of measuring resilience in a
relevant and operational manner. Third, we then address the question of whether
resilience can be conceived only in the context of a confrontation with trauma,
or whether its application can be relevant to the everyday nontraumatic
adversity. In this regard, we introduce and define another coping strategy which 
is the Sense of Coherence (SOC). Fourth, we discuss the nature of resilience,
that is to say, whether it should be considered as a personality trait or as an
aptitude. We try to show that this problem arises from the difficulty to specify 
the emotional processes involved in resilience. Finally, we propose future
research perspectives that should allow us to better understand the concept of
resilience.

Publisher: Dans cet article, nous abordons différentes questions relatives au
concept de résilience, classiquement définie comme un processus dynamique
permettant une adaptation positive dans un contexte d’adversité significative.
Premièrement, nous tentons d’attirer l’attention du lecteur sur l’importance du
concept de résilience en termes de santé publique. Deuxièmement, nous abordons la
question de la difficulté à mesurer la résilience de façon pertinente et
opérationnelle. Troisièmement, nous abordons ensuite la question de savoir si la 
résilience ne peut se concevoir que dans le contexte d’une confrontation à un
traumatisme ou si son application peut être pertinente par rapport à l’adversité 
quotidienne, non traumatique, mais que chacun rencontre au cours de son
existence. A ce propos, nous introduisons et définissons une autre stratégie de
coping qui est le Sens de la Cohérence (Sense of Coherence/ SOC). Quatrièmement, 
nous traitons ensuite de la nature-même de la résilience, c’est-à-dire le fait de
déterminer si elle doit être considérée soit comme un trait de personnalité, soit
comme une aptitude. Nous tentons de montrer que cette problématique provient de
la difficulté à préciser les processus émotionnels en jeu dans la résilience.
Enfin, nous proposons des perspectives de recherches futures qui devraient
permettre d’appréhender de manière plus fine le concept de résilience.
DOI: 10.30637/2018.17-050 
PMID: 29528595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Psychooncology. 2018 Jun;27(6):1615-1621. doi: 10.1002/pon.4702. Epub 2018 Apr 6.

Sense of coherence is a predictor of survival: A prospective study in women
treated for breast cancer.

Lindblad C(1), Langius-Eklöf A(2), Petersson LM(2), Sackey H(3), Bottai M(4),
Sandelin K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Division of Biostatistics, Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Sense of coherence (SOC) reflects a person's overall orientation to
life. Sense of coherence guides the person in finding and utilizing resources to 
maintain health and manage stress. Previously, we demonstrated SOC's stability
over time among breast cancer (BC) patients, and in the present article, SOC's
predictive value for survival is tested.
METHODS: A cohort of 487 women underwent surgery for invasive BC and completed
preoperatively the SOC-13 within a multicenter trial. Hazard ratios (HRs) were
performed to identify significant independent predictors and their association
with increase in SOC.
RESULTS: Over a median follow-up time of 10 years, patients with a higher SOC had
63% lower risk of BC progression (HR 0.63; 95% CI, 0.11 to 0.85, P .03), 80%
lower risk of BC mortality (HR 0.80; 95% CI, 0.38 to 0.96, P .00), and 80% lower 
risk of all-cause mortality (HR 0.80; 95% CI, 0.47 to 0.93, P .00) than patients 
with a lower SOC. The mortality risk declined by 2.3% for every 1-unit increase
in SOC, both for BC mortality (HR 0.98; 95% CI, 0.96 to 0.99, P .01) and for
all-cause mortality (HR 0.98; 95% CI, 0.96 to 0.99, P .00). The risk of
progression declined by 1.4% for every 1-unit increase in SOC (HR 0.99; 95% CI,
0.97 to 1.00, P .03).
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence of SOC's predictive value for disease
progression and BC-caused and all-cause mortality. Sense of coherence provides a 
complement when designing individual plans that aims to support patients during
their treatment.

Copyright © 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pon.4702 
PMID: 29528529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Z Kinder Jugendpsychiatr Psychother. 2018 Mar;46(2):93-95. doi:
10.1024/1422-4917/a000570.

[Self-optimization – a topic for child and adolescent psychiatry?].

[Article in German]

Lehmkuhl G(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Klinik für Psychiatrie, Psychosomatik und Psychotherapie des Kindes- und
Jugendalters der Universität zu Köln, Köln.

DOI: 10.1024/1422-4917/a000570 
PMID: 29521188  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Am J Hosp Palliat Care. 2018 Sep;35(9):1195-1200. doi: 10.1177/1049909118760304. 
Epub 2018 Mar 7.

A Pilot Study of a Mindfulness-Based Art Therapy Intervention in Outpatients With
Cancer.

Meghani SH(1), Peterson C(2), Kaiser DH(3), Rhodes J(4), Rao H(5), Chittams J(4),
Chatterjee A(6).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Biobehavioral Health Sciences; NewCourtland Center for
Transitions and Health; Leonard Davis Institute of Health Economics, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)2 Abramson Cancer Center, Pennsylvania Hospital, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)3 Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk VA, USA.
(4)4 University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)5 Center for Functional Neuroimaging, Perelman School of Medicine, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)6 Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Patients with cancer frequently experience physical and psychological
distress that can worsen their quality of life.
OBJECTIVES: We assessed the outcomes of an 8-week mindfulness-based art therapy
(MBAT) intervention, Walkabout: Looking In, Looking Out, on symptoms, sleep
quality, health-related quality of life, sense of coherence (SOC), and
spirituality in outpatients with cancer.
METHODS: A 1-group, pre-post intervention design with repeated measures at
baseline, week 4, and week 8.
RESULTS: Despite a small pilot sample (n = 18), we found large effect sizes and
statistically significant improvements from week 1 to week 8 in depression, the
comprehensibility subscale of the SOC, and each subscale of spirituality, that
is, peace, meaning, and faith. There were no significant changes in physical
functioning, pain, sleep, tiredness, drowsiness, nausea, and appetite.
CONCLUSIONS: The MBAT intervention, Walkabout, seems to meet key palliative care 
goals including improvement in emotional well-being, comprehensibility, and
meaning making among outpatients with cancer.

DOI: 10.1177/1049909118760304 
PMID: 29514486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Memory. 2018 Oct;26(9):1220-1232. doi: 10.1080/09658211.2018.1441422. Epub 2018
Mar 3.

Examining the factor structure of narrative meaning-making for stressful events
and relations with psychological distress.

Graci ME(1), Watts AL(1), Fivush R(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Psychology Department , Emory University , Atlanta , USA.

This study examined the underlying factor structure of 15 narrative
meaning-making indices for narratives of stressful events, and explored the
incremental validity of the narrative factor solution over and above general
personality traits in predicting various indices of psychological well-being.
Two-hundred and twenty four undergraduates (Mage = 19.2 years, SDage = 2.1; 114
males and 110 females; 67.6% Caucasian, 12.0% East Asian, 7.6% African-American, 
4.0% South Asian, 2.2% Hispanic, and 6.7% as mixed or Other origin) wrote about
the most traumatic experience in their life, and completed a series of
psychological questionnaires. The narratives were coded in 15 ways theoretically 
derived from the narrative meaning-making literature. A series of exploratory
structural equation models indicated that a four-factor solution best
approximated the data. The four factors were: positive processing, negative
processing, integrative meaning, and structure. All four factors related
differentially to indices of well-being over and above traits. There appear to be
four distinct, but related, factors of narrative meaning-making for memories of
stressful events, which shed light on the nuanced relations with well-being.

DOI: 10.1080/09658211.2018.1441422 
PMID: 29502461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Gac Sanit. 2019 May - Jun;33(3):259-262. doi: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2017.11.013. Epub 
2018 Feb 27.

[Characteristics present in secondary school students who do not smoke and who
have no intention to smoke].

[Article in Spanish]

Lima-Serrano M(1), Martínez-Montilla JM(2), Vargas-Martínez AM(1), Zafra-Agea
JA(3), Lima-Rodríguez JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Enfermería, Facultad de Enfermería, Fisioterapia y Podología, 
Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, España.
(2)Departamento de Enfermería, Facultad de Enfermería, Fisioterapia y Podología, 
Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, España. Electronic address:
josmarmon3@alum.us.es.
(3)USR Metropolitana Sud, Direcció Atenció Primària Costa de Ponent, Institut
Català de la Salut, Barcelona, España.

OBJECTIVE: To know the variables present in primary and secondary school students
who do not smoke or intend to smoke from a positive health model.
METHODS: Cross-sectional study with 482 students from Andalusia and Catalonia
using a validated questionnaire (ESFA and PASE project). Binary logistic
regression analysis was performed.
RESULTS: Those who did not intend to smoke viewed smoking unfavourably and had
high self-efficacy (p <0.001). In non-consumers, the most associated variables
were attitude, social model (p <0.001), and self-efficacy (p =0.005).
CONCLUSIONS: The results show motivational factors present in students who do not
smoke and do not intend to do so. Attitude and self-efficacy are strongly
associated with intention and behaviour. This information might be useful for
developing positive health promotion strategies from a salutogenesis approach.

Copyright © 2018 SESPAS. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2017.11.013 
PMID: 29499895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2018 Oct;17(7):589-597. doi: 10.1177/1474515118762796.
Epub 2018 Mar 1.

Effects of brief mindfulness-based cognitive behavioural therapy on
health-related quality of life and sense of coherence in atrial fibrillation
patients.

Malm D(1)(2), Fridlund B(1), Ekblad H(1), Karlström P(1)(2), Hag E(1)(2), Pakpour
AH(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 School of Health and Welfare, Jönköping University, Jönköping, Sweden.
(2)2 Department of Internal Medicine, County Hospital Ryhov, Jönköping, Sweden.
(3)3 Social Determinants of Health Research Center, Qazvin University of Medical 
Sciences, Qazvin, Iran.

Erratum in
    Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2018 Oct;17(7):668.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of a brief dyadic
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) programme on the health-related quality of
life (HRQoL), as well as the sense of coherence in atrial fibrillation patients, 
up to 12 months post atrial fibrillation.
METHODS: A longitudinal randomised controlled trial with a pre and 12-month
post-test recruitment of 163 persons and their spouses, at a county hospital in
southern Sweden. In all, 111 persons were randomly assigned to either a CBT (
n=56) or a treatment as usual (TAU) group ( n=55). The primary outcome was
changes in the HRQoL (Euroqol questionnaire; EQ-5D), and the secondary outcomes
were changes in psychological distress (hospital anxiety and depression scale;
HADS) and sense of coherence (sense of coherence scale; SOC-13).
RESULTS: At the 12-month follow-up, the CBT group experienced a higher HRQoL than
the TAU group (mean changes in the CBT group 0.062 vs. mean changes in the TAU
group -0.015; P=0.02). The sense of coherence improved in the CBT group after the
12-month follow-up, compared to the TAU group (mean changes in the CBT group
0.062 vs. mean changes in the TAU group -0.16; P=0.04). The association between
the intervention effect and the HRQoL was totally mediated by the sense of
coherence ( z=2.07, P=0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: A dyadic mindfulness-based CBT programme improved HRQoL and reduced 
psychological distress up to 12 months post atrial fibrillation. The sense of
coherence strongly mediated the HRQoL; consequently, the sense of coherence is an
important determinant to consider when designing programmes for atrial
fibrillation patients.

DOI: 10.1177/1474515118762796 
PMID: 29493266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Rev Esp Geriatr Gerontol. 2018 Jul - Aug;53(4):196-201. doi:
10.1016/j.regg.2017.12.002. Epub 2018 Feb 24.

[Assessment of the sense of coherence in the perceived burden and in the
adherence to a psycho-educational program for informal caregivers of dependent
persons].

[Article in Spanish]

Turró Garriga O(1), Farrés Costa S(2), Pérez Terré A(3), Batlle Amat P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de investigación en Envejecimiento, Discapacidad y Salud, Instituto de
Investigación Biomédica de Girona [IdIBGi], Salt, España. Electronic address:
oriol.turro@ias.cat.
(2)Centro de servicio para la gente mayor Edat3Besalú, Besalú, España.
(3)Cooperativa Edat3 SCCL, Besalú, España.
(4)Área de Políticas y Promoción de la Salud, DipSalut (Organismo de Salut
Pública de la Diputación de Girona), Girona, España.

INTRODUCTION: The care of dependent persons is arduous, and requires time,
energy, and physical effort on the part of caregivers. Personal characteristics, 
such as the sense of coherence (SOC), can influence the perceived burden and care
giving.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the impact of SOC on the perceived burden and to
determine if these characteristics are associated with adherence to a
psycho-educational program for informal caregivers.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: Prospective observational study of caregivers of dependent
persons participating in the 'School of Caregivers', a psycho-educational program
for family and paid caregivers. An analysis was made of the SOC-13 items and the 
results of the Zarit Burden Interview. The relationship between the SOC and the
adherence to the program (≥50% sessions) was also analysed.
RESULTS: The study included 96 participants, with 71.9% family carers. The higher
burden was associated with a lower SOC meaningfulness factor (β=-0.388; P=.002), 
and to be a relative vs. paid carer (β=-0.300; P=.010). Just over half (52.1%) of
carers completed 50% or more sessions, and in the case of the relatives, this
adherence increased by higher SOC (OR: 1.1, P=.034), and lower burden (OR: 0.95, 
P=.032). The lack of adherence of paid caregivers was not associated with any of 
the analysed variables.
CONCLUSIONS: The sense of coherence and mainly the meaning, is a characteristic
to take into account for the adaptation of interventions in caregivers and
provide them with greater equity working more on the people who need it the most 
(lower SOC and greater burden).

Copyright © 2018 SEGG. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.regg.2017.12.002 
PMID: 29486948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Pediatr Dent. 2018 Jan 1;40(1):23-29.

Parent's Sense of Coherence and Children's Oral Health-Related Behaviors: Is
There an Association?

Elyasi M(1), Abreu LG(2), Olsen C(3), Baker SR(4), Lai H(5), Major PW(6), Amin
M(7).

Author information: 
(1)PhD candidate, Orthodontic Graduate Program, in the School of Dentistry,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Assistant professor, Department of Paediatric Dentistry and Orthodontics,
Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(3)Dental general practice resident, University of Calgary.
(4)Professor, Academic Unit of Dental Public Health, University of Sheffield, in 
Sheffield, South Yorkshire, U.K.
(5)Associate professor, in the School of Dentistry, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(6)Professor and chair, in the School of Dentistry, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(7)Associate professor and head, Division of Pediatric Dentistry, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada;, Email: maryam.amin@ualberta.ca.

PURPOSE: Parental capacity to face day-to-day stressors has a relevant role in
recognizing and mobilizing resources to control children's oral health behaviors.
This capacity has been explored by means of the sense of coherence. The purpose
of this study was to explore the association between mothers' sense of coherence 
(SOC) and their preschool children's oral health-related behaviors.
METHODS: Mothers and their pre-school children were recruited during immunization
programs at community health centers in Edmonton, Canada. Participants answered
eight questions on socio-demographics (covariates), parents' SOC (main
independent variable), and children's oral health-related practices (outcome
variables). Statistical analyses comprised a two-sample t test, chi-square test, 
and logistic regression.
RESULTS: A total of 378 pairs of mothers/ children participated in this study.
Children's mean age was 3.92±(1.33) years. Mothers' SOC was statistically
associated with children's frequency of sugar consumption and frequency and
pattern of dental visits. The children of mothers who had higher levels of SOC
presented a lower frequency intake of food or drink containing sugar and were
more likely to visit the dentist for preventive purposes.
CONCLUSIONS: Mothers' sense of coherence had a significant association with
children's oral health-related behaviors; a higher SOC of mothers was associated 
with more positive behaviors among their children.


PMID: 29482678  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Health Expect. 2018 Aug;21(4):787-795. doi: 10.1111/hex.12674. Epub 2018 Feb 25.

Personal strengths reported by people with chronic illness: A qualitative study.

Kristjansdottir OB(1), Stenberg U(1)(2), Mirkovic J(1), Krogseth T(1), Ljoså
TM(3), Stange KC(4), Ruland CM(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Shared Decision Making and Collaborative Care Research, Division of
Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Learning and Mastery in Health, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Pain Management and Research, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway.
(4)Center for Community Health Integration, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH, USA.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo,
Norway.

BACKGROUND: Self-management of chronic illness can be highly demanding and people
need to mobilize their personal strengths to live well with their condition. More
knowledge is needed about how people with chronic illness perceive and use their 
personal strengths as a basis for better integrating empowering person-centred
approaches into health care.
OBJECTIVE: To explore what people with chronic illness describe as their
strengths relevant to their health and well-being.
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: Thirty-nine participants (11 men) from 4 outpatient
self-management programmes were recruited to individual or group interviews.
Participants included patients with chronic respiratory disease (n = 7), chronic 
pain (n = 18) and morbid obesity (n = 14). Interviews were analysed using content
analysis.
RESULTS: A number of personal strengths were reported and categorized into 3
domains: (i) Internal strengths, (ii) External strengths and (iii)
Self-management strategies. Internal strengths included being persistent, having 
a positive outlook, being kind and caring, experiencing positive emotions, being 
kind towards oneself, reconciling oneself with the situation, having courage and 
having knowledge and insight. External strengths included support from family,
friends, peers and health-care providers. Self-management strategies included
being active, planning and prioritizing, reducing stress, goal setting and
seeking knowledge and help.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: The study provides insights into personal strengths as
reported by people with chronic illness. The results complement prior findings on
strengths in people with health challenges and can aid in incorporating
person-centred approaches into health care.

© 2018 The Authors Health Expectations published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/hex.12674 
PMCID: PMC6117496
PMID: 29478260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Retin Cases Brief Rep. 2021 Jan 1;15(1):31-37. doi: 10.1097/ICB.0000000000000731.

INVERTED INTERNAL LIMITING MEMBRANE-FLAP TECHNIQUE FOR OPTIC DISK PIT
MACULOPATHY: MORPHOLOGIC AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS.

Sborgia G(1), Recchimurzo N, Sborgia L, Niro A, Sborgia A, Piepoli M, Alessio G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Science, Neuroscience and Sense Organs, Eye Clinic,
University of Bari, Bari, Italy.

PURPOSE: To analyze morphologic and functional changes after inverted internal
limiting membrane-flap technique for optic disk pit maculopathy using optical
coherence tomography, multifocal electroretinography, and microperimetry.
METHODS: One case report.
RESULTS: A 30-year-old woman presented us with decreased visual acuity (20/63) in
the left eye because of retinoschisis and serous macular detachment associated
with optic disk pit. Optical coherence tomography did not localize the source of 
intraretinal and subretinal fluid. A partial flattening of serous detachment
after vitrectomy with internal limiting membrane peeling, inverted internal
limiting membrane-flap technique, and gas tamponade was reported. Visual acuity
and multifocal electroretinography improved while retinal sensitivity decreased
at microperimetry during 3 months of follow-up.
CONCLUSION: Optical coherence tomography is helpful to assess the effectiveness
of surgical maneuvers to treat optic disk pit maculopathy. Multifocal
electroretinography and microperimetry might offer additional tools for follow-up
analysis of retinal function after surgery.

DOI: 10.1097/ICB.0000000000000731 
PMID: 29474223 


401. J Music Ther. 2018 Mar 9;55(1):83-108. doi: 10.1093/jmt/thy001.

Differences between Supportive Music and Imagery and Music Listening during
Outpatient Chemotherapy and Potential Moderators of Treatment Effects.

Burns DS(1), Meadows AN(2), Althouse S(3), Perkins SM(3), Cripe LD(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Engineering and Technology at IUPUI.
(2)Shenandoah University.
(3)IU School of Medicine/IU Simon Cancer Center.

Erratum in
    J Music Ther. 2018 Jun 7;55(2):254.

Background: Supportive music and imagery and music listening interventions have
been effective in decreasing distress and improving mood in cancer patients
receiving chemotherapy, but it is unclear whether the two interventions differ in
their treatment benefits. Furthermore, previous studies have not examined
moderators to determine which subgroup(s) of patients may benefit most from each 
intervention.
Objective: To examine the effects of supportive music and imagery compared with
preferred music listening on responsiveness to music therapy, distress, anxiety
and depression, and benefit finding. A secondary purpose was to explore sense of 
coherence and locus of control as potential moderators of intervention
effectiveness.
Methods: A single-session, two-group comparative effectiveness randomized trial
in two cancer centers. Patients were randomized to supportive music and imagery
or preferred music listening during outpatient chemotherapy treatment. Data were 
collected at baseline and immediately after the 45-minute session. ANCOVA models 
were used to determine main effects of intervention as well as pairing potential 
moderators with group assignment to explore differences in intervention effects
by moderator.
Results: There were differential effects between the two interventions with the
supportive music and imagery group scoring higher in responsiveness to music
therapy and benefit finding. The music listening group scores indicated lower
distress. The exploratory moderating analyses suggested Health Locus of
Control-Internal and Sense of Coherence influenced intervention effectiveness.
Conclusions: Music and imagery and preferred music listening experiences may
serve different therapeutic purposes, access and activate different patient
resources, and may be helpful at different stages of treatment.

DOI: 10.1093/jmt/thy001 
PMID: 29471518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Gac Sanit. 2018 May - Jun;32(3):275-282. doi: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2017.11.006. Epub 
2018 Feb 15.

Unravelling salutogenic mechanisms in the workplace: the role of learning.

Pijpker R(1), Vaandrager L(2), Bakker EJ(3), Koelen M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Health and Society, Department of Social Sciences, Wageningen University &
Research, Wageningen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: roald.pijpker@live.nl.
(2)Health and Society, Department of Social Sciences, Wageningen University &
Research, Wageningen, the Netherlands.
(3)Mathematical and Statistical Methods - Biometris, Department of Plant
Sciences, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the moderating and mediating role(s) of learning within the
relationship between sense of coherence (SOC) and generalized resistance
resources.
METHOD: Cross-sectional study (N=481), using a self-administered questionnaire,
of employees working in the healthcare sector in the Netherlands in 2017. Four
residential healthcare settings and one healthcare-related Facebook group were
involved. Multiple linear regression models were used to test for moderating and 
mediating effects of learning.
RESULTS: Social relations, task significance, and job control significantly
explained variance in SOC. Conceptual, social, and instrumental learning,
combined, moderated the relationship between SOC and task significance.
Instrumental learning moderated the relationship between job control and SOC.
Social learning also mediated this relationship. Conceptual learning did not show
any moderating or mediating effect.
CONCLUSIONS: The relationship between SOC and the three GRRs seems to be
strengthened or explained-to a certain extent-by instrumental and social
learning. Healthcare organizations are recommended to promote learning through
formal activities as well as through cooperation, feedback, sharing experiences, 
and job challenges. This requires employee participation and a multilevel
interdisciplinary approach.

Copyright © 2018 SESPAS. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2017.11.006 
PMID: 29455926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Relig Health. 2018 Jun;57(3):1125-1132. doi: 10.1007/s10943-018-0583-5.

Existential Meaning of Patients with Chronic Facial Pain.

de Siqueira SRDT(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Arts, Science and Humanities, Interdisciplinary Pain and Orofacial
Pain Groups, Neurology Department, School of Medicine, University of Sao Paulo
(USP), Av Piassanguaba 75 ap 93, São Paulo, SP, 04060-000, Brazil.
silviadowgan@hotmail.com.

Coping strategies are necessary to deal with pain, one of the most disabling
conditions. Treatments are often refractory, and the elaboration of existential
meaning is necessary to live with residual pain. The objective of this study was 
to discuss the relevance of the meaning of life in coping with refractory chronic
neuropathic facial pain according to singular cases. Each patient is unique and
needs a singular approach to understand and treat the pain phenomenon.
Self-transcendence, existential issues and philosophical values are central
concepts to assess chronic conditions and should be highlighted in medical
practice these days.

DOI: 10.1007/s10943-018-0583-5 
PMID: 29455430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Cortex. 2018 Apr;101:60-72. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2017.12.024. Epub 2018 Jan 31.

Attention as the 'glue' for object integration in parietal extinction.

Conci M(1), Groß J(2), Keller I(3), Müller HJ(4), Finke K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.
Electronic address: conci@psy.lmu.de.
(2)Department of Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.
(3)Schön Clinic Bad Aibling, Germany; Department of Neuropsychology, Medical Park
Bad Feilnbach, Germany.
(4)Department of Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany;
Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, UK.
(5)Department of Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany;
Hans-Berger Department of Neurology, University Hospital Jena, Germany.

Patients with unilateral, parietal brain damage frequently show visual
extinction, which manifests in a failure to identify contralesional stimuli when 
presented simultaneously with other, ipsilesional stimuli (but full awareness for
single stimulus presentations). Extinction reflects an impairment of spatial
selective attention, leaving basic preattentive processing unaffected. For
instance, access to bilaterally grouped objects is usually spared in extinction, 
suggesting that grouping occurs at a stage preceding (in the patients: abnormally
biased) spatial-attentional selection. Here, we reinvestigated this notion by
comparing (largely between participants, but also within a single-case
participant) conditions with objects that varied in their dominant direction of
grouping: from the attended to the non-attended hemifield (data from Conci
et al., 2009) versus from the non-attended to the attended hemifield (new data). 
We observe complete absence of extinction when shape completion extended from the
attended hemifield. By contrast, extinction was not diminished when object
groupings propagate from the unattended hemifield. Moreover, we found the
individual severity of the attentional impairment (assessed by a standard
"inattention" test) to be directly related to the degree of completion in the
unattended hemifield. This pattern indicates that grouping can overcome visual
extinction only when object integration departs from the attended visual field,
implying, contrary to many previous accounts, that attention is crucial for
grouping to be initiated.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2017.12.024 
PMID: 29454223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Clin Psychol Med Settings. 2018 Sep;25(3):316-333. doi:
10.1007/s10880-018-9551-1.

Illness Beliefs, Treatment Beliefs and Information Needs as Starting Points for
Patient Information: The Evaluation of an Intervention for Patients with
Depression.

Glattacker M(1), Heyduck K(2), Meffert C(3), Jakob T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Health Care Research and Rehabilitation Research, Medical Center - 
University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Hugstetter
Str. 49, 79106, Freiburg, Germany. manuela.glattacker@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(2)Section of Health Care Research and Rehabilitation Research, Medical Center - 
University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Hugstetter
Str. 49, 79106, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Palliative Care, University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.
(4)Rehabilitation Center Glotterbad, Glottertal, Germany.

Patients with depression are often dissatisfied with disease- and therapy-related
information. The objective of this study was to evaluate an intervention that
applied the Common Sense Model to the provision of information during inpatient
rehabilitation for patients with depression. The intervention was evaluated in a 
sequential control group design. Analyses of covariance were used to assess
differences between the control and intervention groups. Changes with respect to 
illness and treatment beliefs (personal control, treatment control, coherence and
concerns about medicines), satisfaction with information about medicines, illness
and rehabilitation, and depressive burden were selected as primary outcome
measures. We observed significant between-group differences indicating the
intervention group's superiority in terms of satisfaction with information
regarding medicines. However, the two groups' changes during rehabilitation did
not differ in terms of the other outcomes. The intervention resulted in patients 
judging that their medication information needs had been more thoroughly
fulfilled than those patients who received care-as-usual information. However,
the intervention did not prove to be effective when the other outcome variables
are considered. Taken together and bearing in mind the limitations of our
study-particularly the non-randomised design-our results should be replicated in 
a randomised controlled trial.

DOI: 10.1007/s10880-018-9551-1 
PMID: 29453506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Issues Ment Health Nurs. 2018 Jul;39(7):585-591. doi:
10.1080/01612840.2017.1422200. Epub 2018 Feb 15.

Health Risks among People with Severe Mental Illness in Psychiatric Outpatient
Settings.

Blomqvist M(1), Ivarsson A(1), Carlsson IM(1), Sandgren A(2), Jormfeldt H(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Halmstad University, School of Health and Welfare , Halmstad , Sweden.
(2)b Linnaeus University, Center for Collaborative Palliative Care , Department
of Health and Caring Sciences , Växjö , Sweden.

Life expectancy is greatly reduced in patients with schizophrenia, and
cardiovascular diseases are a leading cause of mortality. The aim of this
cross-sectional study was to investigate the prevalence of overweight, obesity,
and cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk and to investigate the relationships
between self-rated health, sense of coherence, CVD risk, and body mass index
(BMI) among people with severe mental illness (SMI) in psychiatric outpatient
settings. Nearly 50% of the participants were exposed to moderate/high risk of
CVD and over 50% were obese. The results showed no statistically relationships
between the subjective and objective measures (Bayes factor <1) of health. The
integration of physical health into clinical psychiatric nursing practice is
vital.

DOI: 10.1080/01612840.2017.1422200 
PMID: 29446657  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Work. 2018;59(1):155-163. doi: 10.3233/WOR-172659.

Recovery, work-life balance and work experiences important to self-rated health: 
A questionnaire study on salutogenic work factors among Swedish primary health
care employees.

Ejlertsson L(1)(2), Heijbel B(2), Ejlertsson G(1)(2), Andersson I(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health and Society, Kristianstad University, Kristianstad, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, Malmö, Faculty of Medicine, Lund University, 
Malmö, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: There is a lack of information on positive work factors among health 
care workers.
OBJECTIVE: To explore salutogenic work-related factors among primary health care 
employees.
METHOD: Questionnaire to all employees (n = 599) from different professions in
public and private primary health care centers in one health care district in
Sweden. The questionnaire, which had a salutogenic perspective, included
information on self-rated health from the previously validated SHIS (Salutogenic 
Health Indicator Scale), psychosocial work environment and experiences, recovery,
leadership, social climate, reflection and work-life balance.
RESULTS: The response rate was 84%. A multivariable linear regression model, with
SHIS as the dependent variable, showed three significant predictors. Recovery had
the highest relationship to SHIS (β= 0.34), followed by experience of work-life
balance (β= 0.25) and work experiences (β= 0.20). Increased experience of
recovery during working hours related to higher self-rated health independent of 
recovery outside work.
CONCLUSION: Individual experiences of work, work-life balance and, most
importantly, recovery seem to be essential areas for health promotion. Recovery
outside the workplace has been studied previously, but since recovery during work
was shown to be of great importance in relation to higher self-rated health, more
research is needed to explore different recovery strategies in the workplace.

DOI: 10.3233/WOR-172659 
PMCID: PMC5817904
PMID: 29439377  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Int J Qual Stud Health Well-being. 2018 Dec;13(1):1435098. doi:
10.1080/17482631.2018.1435098.

Health dynamics in camps and on campuses: stressors and coping strategies for
wellbeing among labourers and students in Cameroon.

Makoge V(1)(2), Maat H(3), Vaandrager L(1), Koelen M(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Health and Society (HSO) group , Wageningen University , Wageningen , The
Netherlands.
(2)b Medical Research Centre , Institute of Medical Research and Medicinal Plant 
Studies (IMPM) , Yaoundé , Cameroon.
(3)c Knowledge Technology and Innovation (KTI) group , Wageningen University ,
Wageningen , The Netherlands.

PURPOSE: For many people living in low-income countries, poverty implies an
increased exposure to conditions that threaten health and wellbeing as well as
reduced capacity to maintain health. Despite the challenging conditions caused by
poverty, people may consider themselves healthy because they have learned to cope
with their situation probably as a result of life experiences which expose people
to both challenges and potential solutions. In this paper we present results from
studying health and wellbeing challenges and mechanisms to cope with challenges
among two different groups of people who are living under conditions of poverty: 
workers of the Cameroon Development Corporation (CDC) and students of the
university of Buea and the university of Yaoundé.
METHODS: We performed a cross-sectional study, interviewing 21 CDC workers and 21
students. Results Our study reveals context-specific stressors emerging from poor
work conditions and study pressure as well as non-context-specific stressors
perceived by respondents as living conditions, poor healthcare and financial
uncertainty. Respondents devised coping mechanisms to overcome exactly those
stressors such as searching for additional money sources, preventive action
towards hazardous living conditions and alternative medical support.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that supporting and promoting such avenues is essential
for enhanced and continuous coping with stressors.

DOI: 10.1080/17482631.2018.1435098 
PMCID: PMC5814764
PMID: 29436294  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2018 Feb 12;20(2):11. doi: 10.1007/s11886-018-0953-3.

PET Molecular Targets and Near-Infrared Fluorescence Imaging of Atherosclerosis.

Celeng C(1), de Keizer B(2), Merkely B(3), de Jong P(2), Leiner T(2), Takx
RAP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
c.celeng@umcutrecht.nl.
(2)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Heart and Vascular Center, Semmelweis University, Gaál József street 9,
Budapest, 1122, Hungary.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: With this review, we aim to summarize the role of positron
emission tomography (PET) and near-infrared fluorescence imaging (NIRF) in the
detection of atherosclerosis.
RECENT FINDINGS: 18F-FDG is an established measure of increased macrophage
activity. However, due to its low specificity, new radiotracers have emerged for 
more specific detection of vascular inflammation and other high-risk plaque
features such as microcalcification and neovascularization. Novel NIRF probes are
engineered to sense endothelial damage as an early sign of plaque erosion as well
as oxidized low-density lipoprotein (oxLDL) as a prime target for
atherosclerosis. Integrated NIRF/OCT (optical coherence tomography) catheters
enable to detect stent-associated microthrombi. Novel radiotracers can improve
specificity of PET for imaging atherosclerosis. Advanced NIRF probes show promise
for future application in human. Intravascular NIRF might play a prominent role
in the detection of stent-induced vascular injury.

DOI: 10.1007/s11886-018-0953-3 
PMCID: PMC5809554
PMID: 29435774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Midwifery. 2018 Apr;59:130-140. doi: 10.1016/j.midw.2018.01.003. Epub 2018 Jan 8.

Women's satisfaction with care at the birthplace in Austria: Evaluation of the
Babies Born Better survey national dataset.

Luegmair K(1), Zenzmaier C(1), Oblasser C(2), König-Bachmann M(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Applied Sciences Tyrol, Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)City, University of London, UK.
(3)University of Applied Sciences Tyrol, Innsbruck, Austria. Electronic address: 
martina.koenig-bachmann@fhg-tirol.ac.at.

OBJECTIVE: to evaluate women's satisfaction with care at the birthplace in
Austria and to provide reference data for cross-country comparisons within the
international Babies Born Better project.
DESIGN: a cross-sectional design was applied. The data were extracted from the
Babies Born Better survey as a national sub-dataset that included all
participants with Austria as the indicated country of residence.
SETTING: an online survey targeting women who had given birth within the last
five years and distributed primarily via social media. In addition to
sociodemographic and closed-ended questions regarding pregnancy and the
childbirth environment, the women's childbirth experiences and satisfaction with 
the birthplace were obtained with three open-ended questions regarding (i) best
experience of care, (ii) required changes in care and (iii) honest description of
the experienced care.
PARTICIPANTS: five hundred thirty-nine women who had given birth in Austria
within the last five years.
MEASUREMENTS AND FINDINGS: based on the concepts of public health, salutogenesis 
and self-efficacy, a deductive coding framework was developed and applied to
analyse the qualitative data of the Babies Born Better survey. Regarding honest
descriptions of the experienced care at the birthplace, 82% were positive,
indicating that most of the respondents were mostly satisfied with the care
experienced. More than 95% of the survey participants' positive experiences and
more than 87% of their negative experiences with care could be assigned to the
categories of the deductive coding framework. Whereas positive experiences mainly
addressed care experienced at the individual level, negative experiences more
frequently related to issues of the existing infrastructure, breastfeeding
counselling or topics not covered by the coding framework. Evaluation of these
unassigned responses revealed an emphasis on antenatal and puerperal care as well
as insufficient reimbursements of expenses by health insurance funds and the
desire for more midwifery-led care.
KEY CONCLUSIONS: although the participating women were mostly satisfied with
perinatal care in Austria, it appears that shortcomings particularly exist in
antenatal and puerperal care and counselling.
IMPLICATIONS FOR RESEARCH: the established coding framework that covered the vast
majority of the women's responses to the open-ended questions might serve as a
basis for cross-country comparisons within the international Babies Born Better
project.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.midw.2018.01.003 
PMID: 29425896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Clin Med Res. 2018 Mar;10(3):226-232. doi: 10.14740/jocmr3299w. Epub 2018 Jan
26.

Stress Factors Associated With Burnout Among Attending Physicians: A
Cross-Sectional Study.

Kawamura Y(1), Takayashiki A(1)(2), Ito M(3), Maeno T(1)(2), Seo E(1)(2)(4),
Maeno T(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Science, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(2)Department of Primary Care and Medical Education, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(3)National Hospital Organization, Kasumigaura Medical Center, Tsuchiura,
Ibaraki, Japan.
(4)Center of Medical Education and Training, University of Tsukuba Hospital,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Background: Burnout in attending physicians is a crucial issue that may
negatively impact patient outcomes, as well as affect the quality of training
provided to residents. To investigate the association between burnout and
stress-coping ability, we conducted a cross-sectional study of attending
physicians.
Methods: From April 2013 to March 2014, we distributed an anonymous,
self-administered questionnaire to 1,897 attending physicians who attended
teaching-related training sessions and workshops. The questionnaire included the 
Maslach Burnout Inventory General Survey (MBI-GS, Japanese version) to evaluate
burnout; the sense of coherence scale (SOC, Japanese version) to measure
stress-coping ability, with higher scores indicating higher stress-coping
ability; the Brief Scales for Job Stress (BSJS) to assess stress and buffering
factors; demographic factors; mean weekly working hours; and factors related to
instructing residents. The MBI-GS was used to determine the presence of physician
burnout. Subjects were divided into tertiles based on SOC scores. We conducted
logistic regression analysis of burnout using the following independent
variables: physician experience, sex, mean weekly working hours, SOC group,
mental workload, and reward from work.
Results: Of the 1,543 (81.3%) attending physicians who responded, 376 did not
meet the inclusion criteria and 106 had missing data, thus 1,061 (55.9%) were
analyzed. The prevalence of burnout was 17.2%. Physicians with burnout had
significantly fewer years of experience as a doctor (P < 0.01), were more likely 
to be female (P < 0.01), worked more hours per week (P < 0.01), and had a lower
SOC score (P < 0.01) than physicians without burnout. On the BSJS, the mean score
of all stress factors was higher and that of buffering factors was lower in
physicians with burnout (P < 0.01). The percentages of physicians with burnout
were 35.7%, 12.8%, and 3.2% in the low, middle, and high SOC groups, respectively
(P < 0.01). Using the high SOC group as a reference, the adjusted odds ratio for 
burnout in the low SOC group was 4.7 (95% confidence interval: 2.31 - 9.63) (P < 
0.01).
Conclusions: In this study, burnout among attending physicians was significantly 
associated with SOC scores after adjustment for stress factors and buffering
factors.

DOI: 10.14740/jocmr3299w 
PMCID: PMC5798270
PMID: 29416582 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.


412. Braz Oral Res. 2018 Feb 5;32:e009. doi: 10.1590/1807-3107bor-2018.vol32.0009.

Evaluation of the association of bruxism, psychosocial and sociodemographic
factors in preschoolers.

Gomes MC(1), Neves ÉT(1), Perazzo MF(2), Souza EGC(1), Serra-Negra JM(2), Paiva
SM(2), Granville-Garcia AF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Estadual da Paraíba - UEPB, Dental School, Department of
Dentistry, Campina Grande, PB, Brazil.
(2)Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais - UFMG, Dental School, Department of
Pediatric Dentistry and Orthodontics, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.

The aim of the present study was to evaluate factors associated with sleep
bruxism in five-year-old preschool children. A preschool-based cross-sectional
study was conducted with 761 pairs of children and their parents/caregivers.
Sleep bruxism was diagnosed using a questionnaire administered to the
parents/caregivers, who also answered questionnaires addressing sociodemographic 
data and parent's/caregiver's sense of coherence. Clinical oral evaluations of
the children to determine dental caries, traumatic dental injuries, malocclusion 
and tooth wear were performed by two researchers who had undergone a training
exercise (interexaminer Kappa: 0.70 to 0.91; intraexaminer Kappa: 0.81 to 1.00). 
Descriptive analysis and logistic regression for complex samples were carried out
(α = 5%). The prevalence of sleep bruxism among the preschool children was 26.9%.
The multivariate analysis revealed that bruxism was associated with poor sleep
quality (OR = 2.93; 95 CI: 1.52-5.65) and tooth wear (OR = 2.34; 95%CI:
1.39-3.96). In the present study, sleep bruxism among preschool children was
associated with tooth wear and poor sleep quality of the child. In contrast,
psychosocial aspects (sense of coherence) were not associated with sleep bruxism.

DOI: 10.1590/1807-3107bor-2018.vol32.0009 
PMID: 29412225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Health Psychol Rev. 2019 Dec;13(4):490-503. doi: 10.1080/17437199.2018.1437550.
Epub 2018 Feb 15.

The Common Sense Model of Self-Regulation and Acceptance and Commitment Therapy: 
integrating strategies to guide interventions for chronic illness.

Karekla M(1), Karademas EC(2), Gloster AT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Crete, Rethymnon, Greece.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Most health behaviour intervention efforts are adapted from the typical
psychological treatment experience and may not take into serious consideration
theories specifically developed to describe the process of adaptation to illness.
This paper presents a proposal for the combination of a theory about the
experience of and adaptation to illness, that is, the Common Sense Model of
Self-Regulation (CSM), and an efficient psychological theory and therapy,
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT). Past combinations of CSM with cognitive 
or cognitive-behavioural interventions have focussed almost only on specific
aspects of this model (mostly, illness representations and action plans) and left
out other, equally important for a fruitful adaptation to illness,
recommendations of the model (e.g., regarding the system coherence). Therefore,
the development of the proposed combination is to try to match a broad array of
the CSM aspects with the principles, intervention techniques and methods employed
by ACT, in order to produce a 'double-pillared' intervention strategy that may
prove especially effective for promoting patients' adaptation to a chronic
condition and enhancing their well-being and health.

DOI: 10.1080/17437199.2018.1437550 
PMID: 29402185  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


414. NeuroRehabilitation. 2018;42(1):103-111. doi: 10.3233/NRE-172198.

Sense of Coherence in persons with late effects of polio.

Nolvi M(1), Brogårdh C(2)(3), Jacobsson L(1)(4)(5), Lexell J(1)(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, Rehabilitation Medicine Research Group, Lund
University, Sweden.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, Physiotherapy Research Group, Lund University, 
Sweden.
(3)Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation Medicine, Skåne University
Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(4)Department of Health Science, Luleå University of Technology, Luleå, Sweden.
(5)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Sunderby Hospital, Luleå, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Sense of Coherence (SOC) is important for successful adaptation and
mental well-being in people with life-long medical conditions. Late effects of
polio (LEoP) often lead to a life-long disability, but no study has assessed SOC 
in this population.
OBJECTIVE: To assess SOC in persons with LEoP and to explore the association
between SOC, demographics (age, gender, marital status and level of education)
and variables related to LEoP (age at polio onset, number of years from polio
until onset of LEoP and self-rated disability).
METHOD: Ninety-three community-dwelling persons with clinically verified LEoP
responded to a postal survey with the Sense of Coherence Scale (SOC-13). A
hierarchical multiple regression analysis was performed to explore the
associations with SOC.
RESULTS: SOC varied considerably among the participants. The mean and median
SOC-13 total sum score was 71.8 and 76 points, which is similar to age-matched
non-disabled people. The number of years before onset of LEoP and self-rated
disability together with the participants' marital status and level of education 
explained 37% (p < 0.001) of the variance in SOC.
CONCLUSION: Persons with LEoP have a level of SOC indicating that they generally 
have the ability to understand, handle and being motivated when dealing with
stressful events and problems arising in their lives as a result of their
disability. Being married and having a higher education, living many years before
onset of LEoP and perceiving a mild to moderate disability contributed to a
strong SOC.

DOI: 10.3233/NRE-172198 
PMID: 29400675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Death Stud. 2019;43(1):9-19. doi: 10.1080/07481187.2018.1430083. Epub 2018 Mar
27.

Association of sense of coherence and supernatural beliefs with death anxiety and
death depression among Romanian cancer patients.

Postolică R(1)(2), Enea V(3), Dafinoiu I(3), Petrov I(3), Azoicăi D(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Regional Institute of Oncology , Iasi , Romania.
(2)b Faculty of Medicine, Department of Oncogenetics , "Grigore T. Popa"
University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Iasi , Iasi , Romania.
(3)c Faculty of Psychology and Education Sciences, Department of Psychology ,
"Alexandru Ioan Cuza" University of Iasi , Iasi , Romania.

The aim of this cross-sectional study was to examine the association of
supernatural beliefs and sense of coherence with death anxiety and death
depression in a Romanian sample of cancer patients. We found support for the
terror management theory worldview defence hypothesis postulating the presence of
a curvilinear relation between death anxiety and supernatural beliefs among
cancer patients. Results conformed to an inverted U-shape quadratic regression,
indicating that cancer patients who scored moderately on supernatural beliefs
were afraid of death the most, while death anxiety was lowest for the extreme
atheists and extreme believers in supernatural entities.

DOI: 10.1080/07481187.2018.1430083 
PMID: 29393825  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Sex Reprod Healthc. 2018 Mar;15:77-82. doi: 10.1016/j.srhc.2017.12.004. Epub 2017
Dec 16.

Well-being, diabetes management and breastfeeding in mothers with type 1 diabetes
- An explorative analysis.

Linden K(1), Berg M(2), Adolfsson A(3), Sparud-Lundin C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Person-Centred Care, Institute of Health and Care Sciences,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. Electronic
address: karolina.linden@gu.se.
(2)Centre for Person-Centred Care, Institute of Health and Care Sciences,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden; Department of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)School of Health Sciences, Örebro University, Sweden.
(4)Centre for Person-Centred Care, Institute of Health and Care Sciences,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: The aim was to explore and investigate associations between
well-being, diabetes management and breastfeeding in mothers with type 1 diabetes
mellitus (T1DM) up to six months postpartum.
METHODS: An explorative analysis of self-reported questionnaires measuring
general well-being, sense of coherence, self-efficacy of diabetes management and 
experiences of diabetes management during breastfeeding, which were distributed
to 155 mothers with T1DM at two months and at six months after childbirth. The
questionnaires were answered by 128 (82.5%) at two months and 137 (88.4%) at six 
months after birth. Statistical analysis included; descriptive statistics,
Wilcoxon sign-rank test, sign test and Spearman's correlation coefficient (rs).
RESULTS: The majority of the mothers had fairly high levels of general well-being
and diabetes management but a quarter had a low sense of coherence at both two
and six months after birth. A weak association was found between more unstable
blood glucose levels and lower general well-being at two months postpartum, but
no other associations with erratic glycaemia was found. Those with lower grades
of general well-being and sense of coherence had a higher need of professional
support to manage their diabetes than they were offered, at both two and six
months.
CONCLUSION: To develop more optimal care routines for mothers with T1DM after
childbirth, further studies are needed to identify those most in need of
additional support.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.srhc.2017.12.004 
PMID: 29389505  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 2018 May;91(4):445-456. doi:
10.1007/s00420-018-1294-7. Epub 2018 Jan 30.

A cohort study on self-reported role stressors at work and poor sleep: does sense
of coherence moderate or mediate the associations?

Hansen ÅM(1)(2), Grynderup MB(3)(4), Rugulies R(5), Conway PM(6), Garde AH(3)(5),
Török E(3), Mikkelsen EG(7), Persson R(8), Hogh A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, 1014, Copenhagen,
Denmark. stk935@sund.ku.dk.
(2)National Research Centre for the Working Environment, Copenhagen, Denmark.
stk935@sund.ku.dk.
(3)Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, 1014, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(4)Department of Neurology, Nordsjællands Hospital, Hillerød, Denmark.
(5)National Research Centre for the Working Environment, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Department of Psychology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Department of Psychology and Communication, Aalborg University, Aalborg,
Denmark.
(8)Department of Psychology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

AIM: The aim of the present study was to examine the bidirectional associations
between subjective role ambiguity and role conflicts at work, respectively, and
self-reported sleep 2 years later. In addition, we also examine whether sense of 
coherence (SOC) moderate or mediate the association between role stressors and
poor sleep and between poor sleep and role stressors.
METHODS: We used questionnaire data collected in 2006 and 2008 from the Workplace
Bullying and Harassment cohort. In 2006, 3363 responded to the questionnaire and 
in 2008 1671 responded. In total, 1569 participants responded in both 2006 and
2008 to the questions on role stressors (in terms of role ambiguity and role
conflicts at work) and sleep problems in both 2006 and 2008. Sleep problems were 
assessed with the awakening index (AWI) and the disturbed sleep index (DSI).
Moderation and mediation analyses of the association were estimated using
structural equation modelling.
RESULTS: We found a prospective association between role stressors and sleep
problems [beta values were 0.07 (95% CI 0.03-0.11) and 0.05 (CI 0.01-0.10) for
DSI and AWI, respectively] when adjusting for sleep problems at baseline, age,
sex, and life style factors (i.e. alcohol, smoking, and leisure time physical
activity). SOC moderated the association showing that participants with lower SOC
scores who reported higher role ambiguity reported sleep problems to a higher
extent than participants with high SOC scores. SOC also mediated the association 
between role stressors and sleep problems. We also found support for sleep
problems at baseline and role stressors 2 years later [DSI 0.04 (CI 0.00-0.08)
and 0.15 (CI 0.09-0.21)] for role ambiguity and role conflicts, respectively.
Similar results were observed for AWI.
CONCLUSION: Subjective role stressors were prospectively associated with sleep
problems. Yet, sleep problems could also prospectively predict subjective role
stressors (i.e. reverse causation). The analyses also showed that SOC may be
regarded as both a mediating and a moderating factor of the association between
subjective role conflicts and poor sleep. We found that SOC moderated the
prospective association so participants with low SOC report more sleep problems
with subjective role conflicts compared to participants with high SOC. Finally,
we also found SOC mediated the prospective association between subjective role
stressors and sleep problems and the reverse association.

DOI: 10.1007/s00420-018-1294-7 
PMID: 29383438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Women Birth. 2018 Oct;31(5):e341-e347. doi: 10.1016/j.wombi.2017.12.010. Epub
2018 Jan 19.

Building capacity and wellbeing in vulnerable/marginalised mothers: A qualitative
study.

Balaam MC(1), Thomson G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research in Childbirth and Health (ReaCH), School of Community Health and
Midwifery University of Central Lancashire, Brook Building, Preston PR1 2HE, UK. 
Electronic address: mbalaam@uclan.ac.uk.
(2)Maternal and Infant Nutrition and Nurture (MAINN), School of Community Health 
and Midwifery University of Central Lancashire, UK.

PROBLEM: The persistence of health inequalities in pregnancy and infancy amongst 
vulnerable/marginalised groups in the UK.
BACKGROUND: During pregnancy and early motherhood some women experience severe
and multiple psychosocial and economic disadvantages that negatively affect their
wellbeing and make them at increased risk of poor maternal and infant health
outcomes.
AIM: To explore vulnerable/marginalised women's views and experiences of
receiving targeted support from a specialist midwifery service and/or a charity.
METHODS: A mixed-methods study was undertaken that involved analysis of routinely
collected birth-related/outcome data and interviews with a sample of
vulnerable/marginalised women who had/had not received targeted support from a
specialist midwifery service and/or a charity. In this paper we present in-depth 
insights from the 11 women who had received targeted support.
FINDINGS: Four key themes were identified; 'enabling needs-led care and support',
'empowering through knowledge, trust and acceptance', 'the value of a supportive 
presence' and 'developing capabilities, motivation and confidence'.
DISCUSSION: Support provided by a specialist midwifery service and/or charity
improved the maternity and parenting experiences of vulnerable/marginalised
women. This was primarily achieved by developing a provider-woman relationship
built on mutual trust and understanding and through which needs-led care and
support was provided - leading to improved confidence, skills and capacities for 
positive parenting and health.
CONCLUSION: The collaborative, multiagency, targeted intervention provides a
useful model for further research and development. It offers a creative,
salutogenic and health promoting approach to provide support for the most
vulnerable/marginalised women as they make the journey into parenthood.

Copyright © 2017 Australian College of Midwives. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wombi.2017.12.010 
PMID: 29370993  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


419. BMC Health Serv Res. 2018 Jan 24;18(1):36. doi: 10.1186/s12913-018-2850-2.

Exploring drivers and challenges in implementation of health promotion in
community mental health services: a qualitative multi-site case study using
Normalization Process Theory.

Burau V(1)(2), Carstensen K(3), Fredens M(3), Kousgaard MB(4).

Author information: 
(1)DEFACTUM - Public Health and Health Services Research, Central Denmark Region,
Aarhus, Denmark. Viola.Burau@stab.rm.dk.
(2)Department of Public Health, University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark.
Viola.Burau@stab.rm.dk.
(3)DEFACTUM - Public Health and Health Services Research, Central Denmark Region,
Aarhus, Denmark.
(4)The Research Unit for General Practice and Section of General Practice,
Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: There is an increased interest in improving the physical health of
people with mental illness. Little is known about implementing health promotion
interventions in adult mental health organisations where many users also have
physical health problems. The literature suggests that contextual factors are
important for implementation in community settings. This study focused on the
change process and analysed the implementation of a structural health promotion
intervention in community mental health organisations in different contexts in
Denmark.
METHODS: The study was based on a qualitative multiple-case design and included
two municipal and two regional provider organisations. Data were various written 
sources and 13 semi-structured interviews with 22 key managers and frontline
staff. The analysis was organised around the four main constructs of
Normalization Process Theory: Coherence, Cognitive Participation, Collective
Action, and Reflexive Monitoring.
RESULTS: Coherence: Most respondents found the intervention to be meaningful in
that the intervention fitted well into existing goals, practices and treatment
approaches. Cognitive Participation: Management engagement varied across
providers and low engagement impeded implementation. Engaging all staff was a
general problem although some of the initial resistance was apparently overcome. 
Collective Action: Daily enactment depended on staff being attentive and flexible
enough to manage the complex needs and varying capacities of users. Reflexive
Monitoring: During implementation, staff evaluations of the progress and impact
of the intervention were mostly informal and ad hoc and staff used these to make 
on-going adjustments to activities. Overall, characteristics of context common to
all providers (work force and user groups) seemed to be more important for
implementation than differences in the external political-administrative context.
CONCLUSIONS: In terms of research, future studies should adopt a more bottom-up, 
grounded description of context and pay closer attention to the interplay between
different dimensions of implementation. In terms of practice, future
interventions need to better facilitate the translation of the initial sense of
general meaning into daily practice by active local management support that
occurs throughout the implementation process and that systematically connects the
intervention to existing practices.

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-018-2850-2 
PMCID: PMC5781336
PMID: 29361935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Clin Nurs. 2018 Apr;27(7-8):e1494-e1500. doi: 10.1111/jocn.14273. Epub 2018 Mar
25.

Effects of loneliness on illness perception in persons with a chronic disease.

Özkan Tuncay F(1), Fertelli T(1), Mollaoğlu M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nursing, Health Sciences Faculty, Cumhuriyet University,
Sivas, Turkey.

AIM AND OBJECTIVES: To determine the effects of loneliness on illness perception 
in persons with a chronic disease.
BACKGROUND: How an illness is perceived not only affects all dimensions of a
person's life but also plays an important role in his/her coping with the
complications and consequences of the disease. One of the factors that influence 
the illness perception is loneliness.
DESIGN: The study is a descriptive study.
METHODS: The study sample included 206 individuals over the 18 years of age,
conscious, having had a chronic illness at least 1 year, having no communication 
problems and agreeing to participate in the study after being informed about the 
study. Data were collected with the Personal Information Form, the Illness
Perception Questionnaire and the University of California Los Angeles Loneliness 
Scale. The forms were administered to the participants in an unoccupied patient
room, and the data were collected through face-to-face interviews.
RESULTS: The results of the study revealed that individuals with a chronic
disease perceived emotional symptoms accompanying the disease more intensely that
they accepted their disease was a chronic one and that their personal control and
treatment control of the disease were at a middle level. The mean score the
participants obtained from the University of California Los Angeles Loneliness
Scale was 38.49 ± 11.15. There was a significant negative correlation between
this mean score and the mean scores obtained from the following subscales
consequences, treatment control, illness perception and emotional
representations.
CONCLUSION: In this study, it was concluded that the participants perceived their
loneliness level as moderate and that their illness perception was negatively
affected as their loneliness levels increased.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: The knowledge of clinical nurses about perception
of patients with chronic illnesses and conditions affecting that perception will 
enhance compliance with the illness management or treatment strategies. Clinical 
nurses should observe residents closely for signs of depression and loneliness
and support their sense of coherence to reduce emotional and social loneliness.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jocn.14273 
PMID: 29345021  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2018 Mar;33(3):355-357. doi: 10.1007/s00384-017-2953-y.

Correction to: Pretreatment quality of life in patients with rectal cancer is
associated with intrusive thoughts and sense of coherence.

Asplund D(1), Bisgaard T(2), Bock D(3), Burcharth J(4), González E(3), Haglind
E(3), Kolev Y(5), Matthiessen P(6), Rosander C(3), Rosenberg J(4), Smedh K(7),
Sörensson MÅ(8), Angenete E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy,
University of Gothenburg, Scandinavian Surgical, Outcomes Research Group (SSORG),
Sahlgrenska University Hospital/Östra, 416 85, Gothenburg, Sweden.
dan.asplund@vgregion.se.
(2)Department of Surgery, Hvidovre Hospital, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy,
University of Gothenburg, Scandinavian Surgical, Outcomes Research Group (SSORG),
Sahlgrenska University Hospital/Östra, 416 85, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Department of Surgery, Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(5)Department of Surgery, NU Hospital group, Trollhättan, Sweden.
(6)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Örebro University,
Örebro, Sweden.
(7)Department of Surgery, Västmanland's Hospital Västerås, 721 89, Västerås,
Sweden.
(8)Department of Surgery, Central Hospital of Karlstad, Karlstad, Sweden.

Erratum for
    Int J Colorectal Dis. 2017 Nov;32(11):1639-1647.

The original version of this article, unfortunately, contained errors.

DOI: 10.1007/s00384-017-2953-y 
PMCID: PMC6828460
PMID: 29332182 


422. Nutrients. 2018 Jan 10;10(1). pii: E66. doi: 10.3390/nu10010066.

Factors Associated with Binge Eating Behavior among Malaysian Adolescents.

Gan WY(1), Mohamad N(2), Law LS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang 43400, Malaysia. wanying@upm.edu.my.
(2)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang 43400, Malaysia.
maslianamohamad@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang 43400, Malaysia. lehshii@gmail.com.

Although there are numerous studies on binge eating behavior in the Western
countries, studies on this behavior in Malaysia are still limited. Therefore,
this cross-sectional study aimed to determine the risk factors associated with
binge eating behavior among adolescents in Malaysia. The study included 356
adolescents (42.7% males and 57.3% females), aged 13 to 16 years. They completed 
a self-administered questionnaire on demographic and socioeconomic backgrounds,
frequency of family meals, family meal environments, family cohesion, perception 
of body size, self-esteem, depressive symptoms, perfectionistic
self-presentation, and binge eating behavior. Furthermore, their weight, height, 
and waist circumference were measured. It was found that 14.0% of the
participants engaged in binge eating behavior (15.2% in females and 12.5% in
males). Additionally, it was identified that high levels of depressive symptoms, 
high levels of body dissatisfaction, poor family cohesion, and low self-esteem
were significantly contributed to binge eating behavior after controlling for sex
(adjusted R² = 0.165, F = 15.056, p < 0.001). The findings may suggest that
improving the relationships between family members, along with eliminating
adolescents' negative emotions could help in the prevention of binge eating
behavior among adolescents. The identified modifiable risk factors should be
incorporated into binge eating preventive programs to increase the effectiveness 
of the programs.

DOI: 10.3390/nu10010066 
PMCID: PMC5793294
PMID: 29320461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


423. Med Hypotheses. 2018 Jan;110:71-75. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2017.11.005. Epub 2017
Nov 13.

Micro-calibration of space and motion by photoreceptors synchronized in parallel 
with cortical oscillations: A unified theory of visual perception.

Jerath R(1), Cearley SM(2), Barnes VA(3), Jensen M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Augusta Women's Center, Augusta, GA, USA. Electronic address: rj605r@aol.com.
(2)Augusta Women's Center, Augusta, GA, USA.
(3)Georgia Prevention Institute, Augusta University, Augusta, GA, USA.
(4)Department of Medical Illustration, Augusta, GA, USA.

A fundamental function of the visual system is detecting motion, yet visual
perception is poorly understood. Current research has determined that the retina 
and ganglion cells elicit responses for motion detection; however, the underlying
mechanism for this is incompletely understood. Previously we proposed that
retinogeniculo-cortical oscillations and photoreceptors work in parallel to
process vision. Here we propose that motion could also be processed within the
retina, and not in the brain as current theory suggests. In this paper, we
discuss: 1) internal neural space formation; 2) primary, secondary, and tertiary 
roles of vision; 3) gamma as the secondary role; and 4) synchronization and
coherence. Movement within the external field is instantly detected by primary
processing within the space formed by the retina, providing a unified view of the
world from an internal point of view. Our new theory begins to answer questions
about: 1) perception of space, erect images, and motion, 2) purpose of lateral
inhibition, 3) speed of visual perception, and 4) how peripheral color vision
occurs without a large population of cones located peripherally in the retina. We
explain that strong oscillatory activity influences on brain activity and is
necessary for: 1) visual processing, and 2) formation of the internal
visuospatial area necessary for visual consciousness, which could allow rods to
receive precise visual and visuospatial information, while retinal waves could
link the lateral geniculate body with the cortex to form a neural space formed by
membrane potential-based oscillations and photoreceptors. We propose that vision 
is tripartite, with three components that allow a person to make sense of the
world, terming them "primary, secondary, and tertiary roles" of vision. Finally, 
we propose that Gamma waves that are higher in strength and volume allow
communication among the retina, thalamus, and various areas of the cortex, and
synchronization brings cortical faculties to the retina, while the thalamus is
the link that couples the retina to the rest of the brain through activity by
gamma oscillations. This novel theory lays groundwork for further research by
providing a theoretical understanding that expands upon the functions of the
retina, photoreceptors, and retinal plexus to include parallel processing needed 
to form the internal visual space that we perceive as the external world.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2017.11.005 
PMID: 29317073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Am J Mens Health. 2018 Jul;12(4):894-899. doi: 10.1177/1557988317748393. Epub
2018 Jan 9.

Sense of Coherence, Smoking Status, Biochemical Cardiovascular Risk Factors and
Body Mass in Blue Collar Workers-Short Report.

Najder A(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Health and Work Psychology, Nofer Institute of Occupational
Medicine, Łódź, Poland.

The crucial cause of cardiovascular disorders is atherosclerosis developed by
abnormal cholesterols levels or disorders affecting blood glucose. One of the
best-known cardiovascular risk factors is also tobacco smoking. Simultaneously,
sense of coherence (SoC) as a personal resource motivating to managing one's own 
health behaviors, such as avoiding tobacco smoking, was reported to be protective
against coronary heart disease. Such association was observed in white-collar
workers but not in blue-collar workers. According to the above, the present
article aims to establish relationships between SoC, smoking behaviors,
biochemical markers (BM): lipids and glucose levels and body mass index (BMI) in 
blue-collar workers. Sense of Coherence Questionnaire (SOC-29), fasting blood
test, and BMI were used to assess such relationships. The study group consisted
of 304 Polish males working 8-hr shifts in a 4-brigade rotating system. The
analysis revealed that SoC level did not differ depending on smoking behavior.
The analysis also showed no differences in BMI and BM depending on SoC.
Concerning smoking status, the study group was divided into three subgroups which
differed regarding triglycerides and glucose levels. The present findings
considering SoC indicate that any psychological construct should not be studied
separately because probably only some sets of different features may influence
one's behavior and BM as well.

DOI: 10.1177/1557988317748393 
PMCID: PMC6131468
PMID: 29313407  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2018 Feb;256(2):307-311. doi:
10.1007/s00417-017-3870-z. Epub 2017 Dec 30.

Near-infrared imaging: an in vivo, non-invasive diagnostic tool in
neurofibromatosis type 1.

Moramarco A(1), Giustini S(2), Nofroni I(3), Mallone F(1), Miraglia E(2),
Iacovino C(2), Calvieri S(2), Lambiase A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sense Organs, 'Sapienza' University of Rome, Viale del
Policlinico 155, 00161, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Dermatology, 'Sapienza' University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, 'Sapienza' University of 
Rome, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Sense Organs, 'Sapienza' University of Rome, Viale del
Policlinico 155, 00161, Rome, Italy. alessandro.lambiase@uniroma1.it.

PURPOSE: Only a few reports in the literature have investigated the presence of
ocular abnormalities in neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF-1) patients. The aim of this
study was to evaluate the prevalence of ocular abnormalities in a large
population of NF1 patients, focusing on the choroidal changes.
METHODS: This study was conducted on 160 consecutive patients with NF1 and 106
sex- and age-matched healthy subjects (control). Each patient underwent a
complete ophthalmological examination inclusive of best-corrected visual acuity, 
intraocular pressure measurement, slit-lamp biomicroscopy, indirect fundus
biomicroscopy, and near-infrared reflectance (NIR) retinography by using the
spectral domain OCT. Moreover, all patients underwent complete dermatological
exam and 1.5-Tesla MRI scan of the brain to assess the presence of optic nerve
gliomas.
RESULTS: Choroidal abnormalities were detected in 97% of patients, with a
positive predictive value of 100% and a negative predictive value of 96.4%.
Interestingly, a small number of patients (4/160; 2.5%) showed Lisch nodules
without choroidal abnormalities, whereas a larger number of patents (22/160;
13.75%) presented choroidal lesions in absence of Lisch nodules. None of the
patients showed the absence of both choroidal lesions and Lisch nodules. The
number of choroidal lesions increased with age (r = 0.364, p = 0.0001) and with
the severity of pathology (r = 0.23, p = 0.003). Any statistically significant
correlation between choroidal lesions, visual acuity, and intraocular pressure
was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: NIR imaging represents an in vivo, non-invasive, sensitive and
reproducible exam to detect choroidal nodules in NF-1 patients, suggesting that
choroidal changes may represent an additional diagnostic criteria for NF1.

DOI: 10.1007/s00417-017-3870-z 
PMID: 29290016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Int J Qual Stud Health Well-being. 2018;13(sup1):1555420. doi:
10.1080/17482631.2018.1555420.

"Don't stop believing!" From health religiosity to an equality-enhancing
hermeneutic of health promotion.

Pelters B(1), Roxberg Å(1).

Author information: 
(1)a School of Health and Welfare , Halmstad University , Halmstad , Sweden.

PURPOSE: Health beliefs are usually regarded as subjective understandings of
one's health. They can, however, be re-interpreted by drawing on the
understanding that the structural features of the health discourse resemble the
characteristics of a religion and on the spiritual dimension of health with its
possibly salutogenic influence. The applicability of the notion of "health
religiosity" and its consequences for individual health promotion are explored.
METHOD: Data consist of already existent semi-structured interviews. These have
been reanalyzed in a deductive-hermeneutical way by using a five-dimensional
concept of religiosity as deductive template.
RESULTS: The concept of religiosity proved to be productive and revealed that all
health dimensions in the case are infused with spiritually ennobled ideas.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that, irrespective of their factual accuracy, the
salutogenic potential of ennobled ideas may best be utilized by understanding
them hermeneutically. An exploration of a narrative hermeneutic approach to
individual health promotion is suggested as the merging of meaning horizons in a 
hermeneutic dialogue is expected to increase awareness of spiritualized aspects
of health beliefs. This may mitigate healthism and health disparities. Moreover, 
three challenges for individual health promotion are anticipated: realizing the
situation, recognizing its complexity and resisting a simplistic practical
approach.

DOI: 10.1080/17482631.2018.1555420 
PMCID: PMC6372043
PMID: 30909824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Memory. 2018 Sep;26(8):1093-1104. doi: 10.1080/09658211.2017.1418380. Epub 2017
Dec 20.

Emotional distress and positive and negative memories from military deployment:
the influence of PTSD symptoms and time.

Niziurski JA(1), Johannessen KB(1)(2), Berntsen D(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Center on Autobiographical Memory Research, Department of Psychology and
Behavioral Sciences , Aarhus University , Aarhus , Denmark.
(2)b Mental Health Services Centre Ballerup , The Capital Region of Denmark ,
Copenhagen , Denmark.

During military deployment, soldiers are confronted with both negative and
positive events. What is remembered and how it affects an individual is
influenced by not only the perceived emotion of the event, but also the emotional
state of the individual. Here we examined the most negative and most positive
deployment memories from a company of 337 soldiers who were deployed together to 
Afghanistan. We examined how the level of emotional distress of the soldiers and 
the valence of the memory were related to the emotional intensity, experience of 
reliving, rehearsal and coherence of the memories, and how the perceived impact
of these memories changed over time. We found that soldiers with higher levels of
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms were more affected by both their
negative and positive memories, compared with soldiers with lower levels of PTSD 
symptoms. Emotional intensity of the most negative memory increased over time in 
the group with highest levels of PTSD symptoms, but dropped in the other groups. 
The present study adds to the literature on emotion and autobiographical memory
and how this relationship interacts with an individual's present level of
emotional distress and the passage of time.

DOI: 10.1080/09658211.2017.1418380 
PMID: 29262750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Psychol Health Med. 2018 Jul;23(6):674-684. doi: 10.1080/13548506.2017.1417613.
Epub 2017 Dec 20.

Doctor-patient relationship and quality of life in Irritable Bowel Syndrome: an
exploratory study of the potential mediating role of illness perceptions and
acceptance.

Hulme K(1)(2), Chilcot J(2), Smith MA(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Psychology Department , Northumbria University , Newcastle , UK.
(2)b Health Psychology Section, Psychology Department , Institute of Psychiatry, 
King's College London , London , UK.
(3)c Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences , University of Western Australia ,
Perth , Australia.

Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) is a functional gastrointestinal disorder
characterised by unpredictable bowel symptoms. These can be difficult to manage, 
consequently impacting quality of life (QoL). In addition, a strained
doctor-patient relationship is independently reported in the qualitative
literature. Given the doctor is often the first port of call for people with IBS,
a difficult relationship may influence subsequent IBS management. Research
suggests illness perceptions are important in determining IBS outcomes in
therapy; however, their association with doctor-patient relationship and QoL is
yet to be investigated. This exploratory study aimed to investigate the
association between these constructs in IBS, as well as potential mediation by
illness perceptions. Online questionnaires measuring doctor-patient relationship,
illness perceptions, acceptance and QoL, were completed by 167 participants who
reported an IBS diagnosis (144 female, mean age = 44.22 years, SD = 15.91 years).
Bootstrapped pathway analysis was used to model the relationship and mediation
effects. There was a significant positive correlation between patient-doctor
relationship and QoL, r = .258, n = 167, p = .001. There was a significant
indirect effect between doctor-patient relationship and QoL through illness
coherence and acceptance (bootstrapped estimate = .058, 95%CI Lower-Upper = .02, 
.095, p = .002). No other indirect effects were observed in combination with good
fit indices for the other illness perceptions. Findings suggest a doctor-patient 
relationship which fosters mutual understanding and helps patients make sense of 
symptoms, increases their ability to manage their IBS in a psychologically
flexible manner, subsequently helping them maintain their QoL.

DOI: 10.1080/13548506.2017.1417613 
PMID: 29260889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Aging Phys Act. 2018 Oct 1;26(4):544-552. doi: 10.1123/japa.2017-0265. Epub
2018 Aug 27.

The Mediating Effects of Resilience, Morale, and Sense of Coherence Between
Physical Activity and Perceived Physical/Mental Health Among Japanese
Community-Dwelling Older Adults: A Cross-Sectional Study.

Kukihara H, Yamawaki N, Ando M, Tamura Y, Arita K, Nakashima E.

The aim of this study was to examine the mediating effects of resilience, morale,
and sense of coherence on the relationship between physical activity and
respondents' perceived physical/mental health and depression among
community-dwelling older adults in Japan. The study included 369 participants
with an average age of 74 years from Kasuishimohara District in Fukuoka
Prefecture, Japan. They completed a survey that included the Resilience Scale,
the Sense of Coherence Scale, the Medical Outcomes Short Form 8, the Philadelphia
Geriatric Center Morale Scale, the Geriatric Depression Scale (Short Form), and a
demographic questionnaire. The results of the path mediation analyses revealed
that resilience and morale fully mediated the relationship between physical
activity and perceived physical/mental health and depression. However, sense of
coherence was not a significant mediator. Some intervention programs are
suggested to maximize the effects of physical activity on one's well-being.
At-risk populations who need such programs are also discussed.

DOI: 10.1123/japa.2017-0265 
PMID: 29252081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Health Promot Int. 2019 Apr 1;34(2):344-355. doi: 10.1093/heapro/dax088.

Poverty-related diseases: factors that predict coping in two Cameroonian
settings.

Makoge V(1)(2), Hogeling L(1), Maat H(3), Vaandrager L(1), Koelen M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Health and Society (HSO) Group, Wageningen University, 6700 EW Wageningen, The
Netherlands.
(2)Medical Research Centre, Institute for Medical Research and Medicinal Plant
Studies (IMPM), Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(3)Knowledge Technology and Innovation (KTI) Group, Wageningen University,
Hollandseweg 1, KN Wageningen, The Netherlands.

In this paper, we explore the connection between poverty and health
(poverty-related diseases: PRDs) by investigating the factors that play a role in
how two groups of people in Cameroon cope with health challenges: workers in a
large agro-industrial organization (living in 'camps') and students in two major 
universities (living on 'campuses'). We investigated factors reported in the
literature as being associated with coping, summarized under the 'salutogenic
umbrella', as well as demographic, social and environmental factors. A total of
509 respondents from camps and campuses participated in this study. We used a
combination of standardized and un-standardized survey instruments to measure
coping. We used χ2 and ANOVA tests to investigate bivariate differences and
multiple logistic regression analysis to determine which significant survey
factors predicted coping. Our results showed expected and unexpected differences 
between the settings. Individual dispositional factors such as sense of coherence
(SOC), self-efficacy (SE), subjective wellbeing and self-rated health differed
significantly between the settings. Expected coping resources such as income and 
SE did not differ between non-copers and copers. Two factors emerged as
predictors of coping: living environment (setting) and SOC. Our results highlight
the need for a multidimensional perspective on poverty and also the need to apply
the salutogenic approach in PRD research. In particular, the emphasis this
approach puts on stressors and the capacity to employ a variety of resources to
overcome stressors is a fruitful way to better understand PRDs and the importance
of location-specific circumstances where poverty, health and diseases are
connected.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/dax088 
PMID: 29237027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Psychophysiology. 2018 Jun;55(6):e13046. doi: 10.1111/psyp.13046. Epub 2017 Dec
7.

Physiological coherence in healthy volunteers during laboratory-induced stress
and controlled breathing.

Mejía-Mejía E(1), Torres R(1), Restrepo D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bioinstrumentation and Signal Processing Laboratory, Biomedical Engineering
Department, Universidad EIA, Envigado, Colombia.
(2)Psychiatry Department, School of Medicine, Universidad CES, Medellín,
Colombia.

Physiological coherence has been related with a general sense of well-being and
improvements in health and physical, social, and cognitive performance. The aim
of this study was to evaluate the relationship between acute stress, controlled
breathing, and physiological coherence, and the degree of body systems
synchronization during a coherence-generation exercise. Thirty-four university
employees were evaluated during a 20-min test consisting of four stages of 5-min 
duration each, during which basal measurements were obtained (Stage 1), acute
stress was induced using validated mental stressors (Stroop test and mental
arithmetic task, during Stage 2 and 3, respectively), and coherence states were
generated using a controlled breathing technique (Stage 4). Physiological
coherence and cardiorespiratory synchronization were assessed during each stage
from heart rate variability, pulse transit time, and respiration. Coherence
measurements derived from the three analyzed variables increased during
controlled respiration. Moreover, signals synchronized during the controlled
breathing stage, implying a cardiorespiratory synchronization was achieved by
most participants. Hence, physiological coherence and cardiopulmonary
synchronization, which could lead to improvements in health and better life
quality, can be achieved using slow, controlled breathing exercises. Meanwhile,
coherence measured during basal state and stressful situations did not show
relevant differences using heart rate variability and pulse transit time. More
studies are needed to evaluate the ability of coherence ratio to reflect acute
stress.

© 2017 Society for Psychophysiological Research.

DOI: 10.1111/psyp.13046 
PMID: 29215144  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Scand J Public Health. 2018 Aug;46(6):597-605. doi: 10.1177/1403494817745188.
Epub 2017 Dec 5.

A nationwide Danish survey on the use of green spaces by people with mobility
disabilities.

Stigsdotter UK(1), Corazon SS(1), Ekholm O(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Geosciences and Natural Resource Management, University of
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)2 National Institute of Public Health, University of Southern Denmark,
Denmark.

BACKGROUND: There is increasing awareness of the importance and health benefits
of living near green spaces. Research usually focuses on the general population's
use of green spaces and there has been little focus on the use of green spaces by
specific groups, such as people with mobility disabilities. This represents a
significant knowledge gap with regard to facilitating access to healthy green
environments by all population groups. This study aims to provide knowledge of
the use of green spaces by people with mobility disabilities.
METHODS: The study was based on data from the Danish Health and Morbidity Survey 
in 2005. The study participants consisted of 11,238 adult Danes, 383 of whom
reported mobility disabilities, meaning that they were dependent on assistive
devices for walking or moving around. Multiple logistic regression analysis was
used to investigate the association between mobility disability and use of green 
spaces.
RESULTS: The results show that respondents who reported mobility disabilities
visited green spaces less often than respondents without mobility disabilities.
The severity of the mobility disability was associated with the frequency of
visits. Frequency of visits was also related to the respondents' health-related
quality of life status.
CONCLUSIONS: These results highlight the need for further research into the
constraints faced by people with mobility disabilities with regard to visiting
green spaces.

DOI: 10.1177/1403494817745188 
PMID: 29207929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Health Promot Int. 2019 Apr 1;34(2):312-322. doi: 10.1093/heapro/dax091.

Predicting Australia's university students' mental health status.

Usher W(1), Curran C(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Education and Professional Studies, Gold Coast campus, Griffith
University, Queensland, Australia.
(2)Runaway Bay Sport & Leadership Excellence Centre, Sports Super Centre, 1
Sports Drive, Runaway Bay, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.

University years are a period of increased morbidity and mortality, associated
with negative health behaviours and corresponding poor mental health (MH) status 
amongst students. With this said, the aim of this research was to determine the
level of influence a number of predictive factors have on Australia's university 
students' MH status. A cross-sectional study design, consisting of an online
survey was implemented. Psychometric measurement components were based on
adopting Bronfenbrenner's socio-ecological model approach to collecting
descriptive statistics. This approach was concerned with investigating patterns
of association between three predictive factors [social emotional wellbeing
(SEWB), physical activity (PA) levels and sporting club (SC) involvement],
against four domains (personal, university, home and community). This study
identified that 25% (n = 571) of participants (n = 2326) indicated that they have
been diagnosed with a MH disorder. Specifically, gender, age, negative health
behaviours, lower levels of PA and SC involvement and poor SEWB, were found to be
significantly and positively associated (p < 0.05*, p < 0.01**) with a MH
diagnosis. Importantly, findings from this study indicate that there are
significant (positive/negative) associations between the identified predictive
factors and participants' MH status. Findings from this study will go towards
informing current and future Student Health Service policies, practices and
infrastructure allocation that address MH status amongst university students.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/dax091 
PMID: 29206924  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Gac Sanit. 2018 Sep - Oct;32(5):488-491. doi: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2017.09.003. Epub 
2017 Dec 6.

[Towards a social determinants-oriented approach to public health: workshop
report].

[Article in Spanish]

Rojo EG(1), Álvarez-Dardet C(2), Fernández LAL(3); Grupo de Trabajo de Salud
Pública Orientada por los Determinantes Sociales de la Salud.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo CTS177-Investigación en Salud y Servicios de Salud, Consejería de
Economía, Innovación y Ciencia; cofinanciación FEDER, Escuela Andaluza de Salud
Pública, Granada, España. Electronic address: elenaglezrojo@gmail.com.
(2)CIBER de Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), España; Grupo de
Investigación en Salud Pública, Universidad de Alicante, Alicante, España.
(3)Grupo CTS177-Investigación en Salud y Servicios de Salud, Consejería de
Economía, Innovación y Ciencia; cofinanciación FEDER, Escuela Andaluza de Salud
Pública, Granada, España; Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria, Granada,
España; Escuela Andaluza de Salud Pública, Granada, España.

This article is the result of a workshop with public health experts held in
Granada (Spain) in October 2015 in order to reflect upon the components of the
framework that should be part of a public health approach based on the social
determinants of health. Advocacy and training professionals in health advocacy
were identified as key elements where this was needed. During the workshop, it
was agreed that the gender perspective, the salutogenic approach,
interdisciplinary work and particular attention to disadvantaged groups are
crucial. The importance of working from a human rights' framework and promoting
legislative changes were also mentioned. Moreover, the group mentioned that even 
though much progress has been made identifying social determinants of health and 
creating conceptual frameworks, there is limited knowledge about how to intervene
to reduce health inequality gaps in our societies.

Copyright © 2017 SESPAS. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2017.09.003 
PMID: 29203324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2018 Mar - Apr;75:76-82. doi:
10.1016/j.archger.2017.11.013. Epub 2017 Nov 24.

A high sense of coherence protects from the burden of caregiving in older spousal
caregivers.

Potier F(1), Degryse JM(2), Henrard S(3), Aubouy G(4), de Saint-Hubert M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, CHU Université catholique de Louvain, Namur,
Belgium; Institute of Health and Society, Université catholique de Louvain,
Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: florence.potier@uclouvain.be.
(2)Institute of Health and Society, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels,
Belgium; Departments of Public Health and Primary Care, Katholieke Universiteit
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Institute of Health and Society, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels,
Belgium; Clinical Pharmacy Research Group, Louvain Drug Research Institute,
Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Department of Geriatrics, CHU Université catholique de Louvain, Namur,
Belgium.
(5)Department of Geriatrics, CHU Université catholique de Louvain, Namur,
Belgium; Institute of Health and Society, Université catholique de Louvain,
Brussels, Belgium.

OBJECTIVES: Caregiving is often associated with burden and chronic stress. Sense 
of coherence (SOC) may help the caregivers in coping with their stress and was
identified as a positive factor for health outcomes and quality of life. We aimed
to study the links between SOC, burden, depression and positive affects among
caregivers of frail older patients.
METHODS: Seventy-nine spousal caregivers were recruited via the geriatric
outpatient clinic.
DATA COLLECTED: Zarit Burden Inventory, SOC-13, Geriatric Depression Scale,
Caregiver Reaction Assessment (CRA), sleep, time of supervision, Katz Index,
Global Deterioration Scale and Neuropsychiatric Inventory.
ANALYSES: Caregiver's characteristics were analyzed by burden severity and SOC
level. Multivariable logistic regressions were used in order to identify the
variable that best predict caregiver burden and high SOC.
RESULTS: The mean age was 79.4±5.3; 53% were women. Among care-recipient, 82% had
cognitive impairment and the median Katz Index was 3. Caregivers with a high SOC 
and an older age reported a lower burden (Odds Ratio (OR) 0.18, 95% confidence
interval (CI) 0.04-0.65 and OR 0.87, 95% CI 0.76-0.98, respectively). A higher
burden was associated with patient functional limitations (OR 8.69, 95% CI
2.28-40.46).
DISCUSSION: Having a high sense of coherence seems to be a protective factor
against the burden. To support caregivers, health providers should recognize the 
expertise of the caregivers and the meaningfulness of this care situation.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archger.2017.11.013 
PMID: 29197259  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Health Promot Int. 2019 Apr 1;34(2):300-311. doi: 10.1093/heapro/dax077.

Modeling the factors associating with health-related habits among Japanese
students.

Mato M(1), Tsukasaki K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kanazawa
University, 5-11-80 Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, Institute of Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health
Sciences, Kanazawa University, Japan.

The aim of the present study was to clarify the structural relationship between
health-related habits and psychosocial factors during adolescence/early
adulthood. An anonymous, self-administered questionnaire was provided to 1141
third- and fourth-year students at eight academic departments from six
universities in regional Japanese cities. Surveys included items addressing
participants' demographic characteristics, psychosocial factors (individual-level
social capital, self-efficacy, mental health (from health-related quality of life
SF-36v2), and sense of coherence (SOC)), and health-related habits. A multiple
indicator analysis based on structural equation modeling was conducted to examine
the structural relationship between health-related habits and these factors.
Valid responses were obtained from 952 participants. The final model demonstrated
a high level of goodness of fit. While the path from SOC to health-related habits
was significant, those from self-efficacy to health-related habits and from
mental health to health-related habits were not significant. The path coefficient
from SOC to health-related habits was greater than the path coefficient from
background characteristics. In the multiple population comparison that considered
gender, a nearly identical model was supported for men and women. Psychosocial
factors related to health-related habits were social capital, self-efficacy,
mental health, and SOC. Furthermore, it was suggested that SOC functions as an
intervening factor for maintaining a healthy lifestyle. It was observed that
individual psychosocial factors influence health-related habits more than their
background characteristics. Findings highlight that supporting the building of
social relationships and social environments is essential to promote a healthy
lifestyle among university students.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/heapro/dax077 
PMID: 29186500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Intensive Crit Care Nurs. 2018 Apr;45:25-30. doi: 10.1016/j.iccn.2017.10.001.
Epub 2017 Nov 26.

The meaning of personal diaries to children and families in the paediatric
intensive care unit: A qualitative study.

Mikkelsen G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anestesiology and Intensive Care, Odense University Hospital,
Sdr. Boulevard 29, DK-5000 Odense C, Denmark. Electronic address:
gitte.mikkelsen@rsyd.dk.

OBJECTIVE: To explore children's' and families' experiences of using intensive
care diaries after discharge and the role of diaries in the process of recovering
from a stay in the paediatric intensive care unit.
DESIGN AND SETTING: Qualitative, exploratory design. Data collection consisted of
semi-structured interviews with five children and their families, conducted four 
to six months after discharge from the intensive care unit. Inclusion criteria
were children and their families, with a stay for more than three days who had a 
diary written for them. Data were analysed using thematic analysis FINDINGS:
Three main themes emerged: (i) value to the entire family, (ii) creating
memories, (iii) the importance of pictures.
CONCLUSION: Diaries were used after discharge as a support for both children and 
families and played a role in making the paediatric intensive care experience
meaningful by providing explanations and coherence. The findings suggest that a
diary can serve as a catalyst for the coping process of the family unit. Findings
also confirm how the children's memories are characterised by a sense of
unreality. The diary could thus help fill in some of the missing picture to
support the children in understanding their story.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.iccn.2017.10.001 
PMID: 29183644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Gac Sanit. 2019 Mar - Apr;33(2):185-190. doi: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2017.09.005. Epub 
2017 Nov 24.

[Sense of coherence and subjective overload, anxiety and depression in caregivers
of elderly relatives].

[Article in Spanish]

López-Martínez C(1), Frías-Osuna A(1), Del-Pino-Casado R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Enfermería, Universidad de Jaén, Jaén, España.
(2)Departamento de Enfermería, Universidad de Jaén, Jaén, España. Electronic
address: rdelpino@ujaen.es.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the relationship between the sense of coherence and
subjective overload, anxiety and depression in caregivers of dependent elderly
relatives.
METHOD: Cross-sectional study in an area of the province of Jaén (Andalusia,
Spain) with a probabilistic sample of 132 caregivers of dependent elderly.
MAIN MEASURES: sense of coherence (Life Orientation Questionnaire), subjective
burden (Caregiver Strain Index), anxiety and depression (Goldberg Scale),
objective burden (Dedication to Care Scale), sex and kinship. Main analyses:
bivariate analysis using the Pearson correlation coefficient and multivariate
analysis using multiple linear regression.
RESULTS: Most of the caregivers studied were women (86.4%), daughter or son of
the care recipient (74.2%) and shared home with the latter (69.7%). When
controlling for objective burden, sex and kinship, we found that the sense of
coherence was inversely related to subjective burden (β = -0.46; p <0.001),
anxiety (β = -0.57; p = 0.001) and depression (β = -0.66; p <0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The sense of coherence might be an important protective factor of
subjective burden, anxiety and depression in caregivers of dependent elderly
relatives.

Copyright © 2017 SESPAS. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2017.09.005 
PMID: 29174275  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Psychother Psychosom Med Psychol. 2018 Feb;68(2):66-74. doi:
10.1055/s-0043-118651. Epub 2017 Nov 23.

[Changes in Sense of Coherence, Mental Distress and Satisfaction with Life and
Studies in the Course of Psychosocial Counselling].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Koutsoukou-Argyraki A(1), Bertolino A(1), Kreß V(1), Hofmann FH(1), Sperth M(1), 
Holm-Hadulla RM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Psychosoziale Beratungsstelle für Studierende (PBS), Studierendenwerk
Heidelberg.
(2)Universidad Diego Portales, Santiago de Chile.

"Sense of coherence" (SOC) plays an essential role in the maintenance or recovery
of health, according to the salutogenetic approach of Aaron Antonovsky. Empirical
studies provide evidence of significant links between sense of coherence and
different indicators of mental health. In the present study, the effectivity of
an integrative counselling concept for the promotion of sense of coherence,
reduction of mental distress and improvement of satisfaction with life was tested
in a sample of 153 clients and patients. Correlations of SOC with mental distress
and satisfaction with life and studies indicate a strong association. After
psychosocial counselling according to the integrative ABCDE-model, significant
pre-/post- changes with moderate to high effect sizes could be achieved. These
findings bring important implications for the modifiability of the sense of
coherence and provide evidence that the integrative ABCDE-model of psychosocial
counseling might be effective. Correlations between ratings of the dimensions of 
the model and pre-/post changes are discussed.

Publisher: Das Kohärenzgefühl spielt im Salutogenesekonzept von Aaron Antonovsky 
eine wichtige Rolle bei der Aufrechterhaltung bzw. der Wiederherstellung von
Gesundheit. Empirische Untersuchungen belegen signifikante Zusammenhänge zwischen
dem Kohärenzgefühl und verschiedenen Indikatoren psychischer Gesundheit. In der
vorliegenden Studie wurde die Wirksamkeit eines integrativen Beratungskonzepts
zur Förderung des Kohärenzgefühls, Reduzierung der psychischen Beeinträchtigung
sowie Verbesserung der Lebens- und Studienzufriedenheit bei 153 studentischen
Klienten untersucht. Korrelationen zwischen Kohärenzgefühl, psychischer
Beeinträchtigung und Lebens-und Studienzufriedenheit weisen darauf hin, dass das 
Kohärenzgefühl eng mit der psychischen Gesundheit sowie mit der Lebens- und
Studienzufriedenheit zusammenhängt. Durch psychosoziale Beratung konnten
signifikante Prä-Post-Veränderungen mit mittleren bis hohen Effektstärken
erreicht werden. Diese Befunde ermöglichen Folgerungen zur Modifizierbarkeit des 
Kohärenzgefühls und der damit einhergehenden Auswirkung auf die psychische
Gesundheit und liefern Hinweise für die Wirksamkeit des integrativen
ABCDE-Modells. Zusammenhänge zwischen Einschätzungen der einzelnen Dimensionen
des Modells und den Prä-Post-Veränderungen werden diskutiert.Das Kohärenzgefühl
spielt im Salutogenesekonzept von Aaron Antonovsky eine wichtige Rolle bei der
Aufrechterhaltung bzw. der Wiederherstellung von Gesundheit. Empirische
Untersuchungen belegen signifikante Zusammenhänge zwischen dem Kohärenzgefühl und
verschiedenen Indikatoren psychischer Gesundheit. In der vorliegenden Studie
wurde die Wirksamkeit eines integrativen Beratungskonzepts zur Förderung des
Kohärenzgefühls, Reduzierung der psychischen Beeinträchtigung sowie Verbesserung 
der Lebens- und Studienzufriedenheit bei 153 studentischen Klienten untersucht.
Korrelationen zwischen Kohärenzgefühl, psychischer Beeinträchtigung und
Lebens-und Studienzufriedenheit weisen darauf hin, dass das Kohärenzgefühl eng
mit der psychischen Gesundheit sowie mit der Lebens- und Studienzufriedenheit
zusammenhängt. Durch psychosoziale Beratung konnten signifikante
Prä-Post-Veränderungen mit mittleren bis hohen Effektstärken erreicht werden.
Diese Befunde ermöglichen Folgerungen zur Modifizierbarkeit des Kohärenzgefühls
und der damit einhergehenden Auswirkung auf die psychische Gesundheit und liefern
Hinweise für die Wirksamkeit des integrativen ABCDE-Modells. Zusammenhänge
zwischen Einschätzungen der einzelnen Dimensionen des Modells und den
Prä-Post-Veränderungen werden diskutiert.
© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-118651 
PMID: 29169198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Die Autoren geben an, dass kein
Interessenkonflikt besteht.


440. J Adv Nurs. 2018 Apr;74(4):946-956. doi: 10.1111/jan.13502. Epub 2017 Dec 5.

Salutogenic Healthy Ageing Programme Embracement (SHAPE) for senior-only
households: A study protocol.

Seah B(1), Kowitlawakul Y(1), Chokkanathan S(2), Fong JJY(3), Espnes GA(4), Ang
E(1), Wang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Alice Lee Centre for Nursing Studies, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Department of Social Work, Faculty of Arts & Social Sciences, National
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Boon Lay Constituency Office, People's Association, Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Department of Public Health and Nursing, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Norwegian University of Science & Technology, Trondheim, Norway.

AIMS: To evaluate the effectiveness of a multi-dimensional community-based health
promotion and risk prevention programme, named Salutogenic Healthy Ageing
Programme Embracement (SHAPE) for senior-only households in Singapore.
BACKGROUND: In view of ageing population and its significant impacts on economy, 
societal structure and policy-making, healthy ageing emerges as an important
concept in maintaining health through the engagement of health-promoting
behaviour and risk prevention actions in older people.
DESIGN: A stratified randomized control trial with process evaluation is
proposed.
METHODOLOGY: The salutogenic model, which focuses on positive well-being and
optimizing health outcomes, provides an underpinning theoretical framework for
this study. SHAPE is a 12-week intervention programme comprising of both weekly
group-based activity sessions and home visits. One hundred and fifty-four
eligible participants will be stratified and randomly allocated to either the
SHAPE intervention or the control group. Both outcome and process evaluation will
be conducted. Outcome measures include sense of coherence, quality of life,
health-promoting behaviours, self-efficacy and other health-related outcomes.
These data will be collected at four time points: baseline, 3 months, 6 months
and 12 months. Individual qualitative face-to-face interviews will be conducted
for older people receiving SHAPE to explore their views on the programme.
DISCUSSION: The use of salutogenic model breaks away from the negatively connoted
conventional biomedical model and addresses optimization of positive health,
providing an overall holistic approach to care of older people. The intervention 
SHAPE seeks to identify, equip and strengthen resources for senior-only
households, encouraging the adaption of health-promoting and risk-preventing
actions to achieve better health outcomes and higher quality of life.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jan.13502 
PMID: 29148074  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Autism. 2019 Jan;23(1):212-222. doi: 10.1177/1362361317738392. Epub 2017 Nov 15.

Autism spectrum disorder and interoception: Abnormalities in global integration?

Hatfield TR(1), Brown RF(1), Giummarra MJ(2), Lenggenhager B(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Australian National University, Australia.
(2)Monash University, Australia.
(3)University of Zurich, Switzerland.

Research over the past three decades has seen a revived interest in the way the
human body-and the way in which it is perceived-interacts with aspects of our
experience. Consequently, interoception (i.e. the perception of physiological
feedback from the body) has recently been shown to be associated with a wide
range of cognitive, emotional, and affective functions, making it broadly
relevant to the study of autism spectrum disorder. Although limited qualitative
accounts and empirical studies suggest that individuals with autism spectrum
disorder encounter abnormalities when perceiving and integrating physiological
feedback from their bodies, other studies have suggested that people with/without
autism spectrum disorder do not differ in interoceptive ability after accounting 
for alexithymia. In this article, we discuss the newly recognized importance of
interoception in autism spectrum disorder with a focus on how deficits in the
perception of bodily feedback might relate to the core features and co-occuring
psychopathology of autism spectrum disorder. Finally, a new integrated theory is 
advanced which posits that people with autism spectrum disorder may experience a 
reduced capacity to integrate interoceptive information that may result in a
narrow attentional bodily focus and reduced motivational and behavioral drives.

DOI: 10.1177/1362361317738392 
PMID: 29139302  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Qual Life Res. 2018 Feb;27(2):455-465. doi: 10.1007/s11136-017-1733-z. Epub 2017 
Nov 9.

Effects of a 9-month resistance training intervention on quality of life, sense
of coherence, and depressive symptoms in older adults: randomized controlled
trial.

Kekäläinen T(1)(2), Kokko K(3), Sipilä S(3), Walker S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Gerontology Research Center and Faculty of Sport and Health Sciences,
University of Jyväskylä, PO Box 35, 40014, Jyväskylä, Finland.
tiia.m.kekalainen@jyu.fi.
(2)Neuromuscular Research Center and Faculty of Sport and Health Sciences,
University of Jyväskylä, PO Box 35, 40014, Jyväskylä, Finland.
tiia.m.kekalainen@jyu.fi.
(3)Gerontology Research Center and Faculty of Sport and Health Sciences,
University of Jyväskylä, PO Box 35, 40014, Jyväskylä, Finland.
(4)Neuromuscular Research Center and Faculty of Sport and Health Sciences,
University of Jyväskylä, PO Box 35, 40014, Jyväskylä, Finland.

PURPOSE: (1) To determine the effects of a 9-month resistance training
intervention on quality of life, sense of coherence, and depressive symptoms in
older adults, and (2) to compare effects between different training frequencies.
METHODS: Men and women aged 65-75 (N = 106) were randomized to four groups
according to training frequency: training groups RT1 (n = 26), RT2 (n = 27), and 
RT3 (n = 28) and non-training control group (n = 25). All training groups
attended supervised resistance training twice a week for 3 months. For the
following 6 months, they continued training with different frequencies (1, 2 or 3
times per week). Psychological functioning was measured by quality of life
(WHOQOL-Bref), sense of coherence (Antonovsky's SOC-13), and depressive symptoms 
(Beck's Depression Inventory II). Measurements were conducted at baseline and 3
and 9 months after baseline. The effects of the intervention were analyzed using 
generalized estimating equations (GEE).
RESULTS: After 3 months, there was an intervention effect on environmental
quality of life (group × time p = .048). Between 3 and 9 months, environmental
quality of life decreased among RT1 compared to RT2 and RT3 (group × time
p = .025). Between baseline and 9 months, environmental quality of life increased
in RT2 compared to all other groups (group × time p = .011). Sense of coherence
increased in RT2 compared to the control group and RT3 (group × time p = .032).
CONCLUSION: Resistance training is beneficial for environmental quality of life
and sense of coherence. Attending resistance training twice a week seems to be
the most advantageous for these aspects of psychological functioning.

DOI: 10.1007/s11136-017-1733-z 
PMCID: PMC5846971
PMID: 29124498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Relig Health. 2018 Aug;57(4):1402-1412. doi: 10.1007/s10943-017-0517-7.

The Coping Mechanisms and Strategies of Hypertension Patients in Ghana: The Role 
of Religious Faith, Beliefs and Practices.

Anyan F(1), Knizek BL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology
(NTNU), 7491, Trondheim, Norway. frederick.anyan@ntnu.no.
(2)Faculty of Nursing, Sør-Trøndelag University College, Trondheim, Norway.

This qualitative study explored the role of religious faith, belief and practice 
systems in the coping mechanisms and strategies of essential hypertension
patients in Accra, Ghana. Six participants were recruited for participation, of
which five were Christians and one was a Muslim. Interviews were conducted and
interpretative phenomenological analysis was used to analyze the data. Results
showed that participants used their religious faith, beliefs and practices as
coping resources. Participants used a deferring-collaborative style of religious 
coping, which seemed to have provided them with an avoidance strategy that
protected the participants from conscious confrontation with their illness.
Religious faith and beliefs also afforded the participants a sense of coherence
that enabled the participants to manage their stress, reflect on their external
and internal resources to promote effective coping and adaptive functioning in a 
health promoting manner. Implications of a deferring-collaborative style of
religious coping and religious re-appraisal are discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s10943-017-0517-7 
PMID: 29110203  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Med Health Care Philos. 2018 Sep;21(3):363-374. doi: 10.1007/s11019-017-9809-7.

Towards living within my body and accepting the past: a case study of embodied
narrative identity.

Sviland R(1), Martinsen K(2), Råheim M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Western Norway University of Applied Sciences HVL, Bergen, Norway.
randi.sviland@hvl.no.
(2)VID Specialized University - Haraldsplass and UIT Campus Harstad, Bergen,
Norway.
(3)University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

This narrative case study, created from several qualitative sources, portrays a
young woman's life experiences and an eight yearlong therapy process with
Norwegian Psychomotor Physiotherapy (NPMP). It is analyzed retrospectively from
an analytical angle, where NPMP theory is expanded with Løgstrup's phenomenology 
of sensation and Ricoeur's narrative philosophy. Understanding Rita's narrative
through this window displayed some foundational phenomena in a singular way,
illuminating embodied experiences in inter-subjective relationships in movement, 
sensation and time entwined. It illustrates how traumatic life experiences may
cause pain, suffering and ruptured narratives with fragmented physical and
sensuous reactions, chaos and loss of temporal coherence with consequences for a 
person's sense of identity. Rita's narrative also illuminates how intersubjective
interaction has healing potentials when there is time and space for trust to
emerge and to support new bodily-based experiences. Embodied sensuous experiences
in present time may help clarify past and present and support chronology in
narration and the sense of identity. With this exemplary case study, we argue
that Løgstrup's and Ricoeur's thinking may add valuable perspectives to
understanding suffering and healing processes in the field of embodied therapies 
like NPMP.

DOI: 10.1007/s11019-017-9809-7 
PMID: 29098562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Pediatr (Rio J). 2018 Nov - Dec;94(6):624-629. doi: 10.1016/j.jped.2017.08.007.
Epub 2017 Oct 31.

Women's sense of coherence and its association with early weaning.

Cortelo FM(1), Marba STM(2), Cortellazzi KL(3), Ambrosano GMB(3), Guerra LM(3),
Almeida ACG(4), Tomar SL(5), Silva MRD(5), Possobon RF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), Faculdade de Ciências Médicas
(FCM), Programa de Pós-graduação "Saúde da Criança e do Adolescente", Campinas,
SP, Brazil; Universidade São Francisco (USF), Curso de Psicologia, Bragança
Paulista, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: cortelo.psicoanalise@gmail.com.
(2)Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), Faculdade de Ciências Médicas
(FCM), Departamento de Pediatria, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
(3)Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), Faculdade de Odontologia de
Piracicaba (FOP), Departamento de Odontologia Social, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil.
(4)Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), Faculdade de Ciências Médicas
(FCM), Programa de Pós-graduação "Saúde da Criança e do Adolescente", Campinas,
SP, Brazil.
(5)University of Florida, College of Dentistry, Gainesville, United States.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether there is an association between sense of
coherence levels and early weaning.
METHOD: This study had a quantitative nature and a cross-sectional design.
Factors associated with early weaning (interruption of maternal breastfeeding)
were investigated in a sample of 425 women older than 18 years, mothers of
children up to 36 months of age who were not twins, with no sensory or motor
deficiencies, without distinction of ethnicity or social class. The chi-squared
test, with a significance level of 5%, was used to evaluate the association
between the dependent variable (early weaning) and the independent variables
(socioeconomic, demographic factors and sense of coherence level). Variables with
p≤0.20 were tested by the multiple logistic regression model. Odds ratio and the 
respective 95% confidence intervals were estimated. All statistical tests were
performed using the SAS 9.2 software.
RESULTS: The results showed that mothers with greater sense of coherence were
1.82 times more likely to maintain breastfeeding for longer periods (p=0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: The identification of mothers with low sense of coherence allows the
early intervention of health professionals, contributing to decrease the rates of
early weaning in the population.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Editora Ltda.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jped.2017.08.007 
PMID: 29097193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Clin Child Fam Psychol Rev. 2018 Mar;21(1):57-93. doi: 10.1007/s10567-017-0245-2.

Perceptions of ADHD Among Diagnosed Children and Their Parents: A Systematic
Review Using the Common-Sense Model of Illness Representations.

Wong IYT(1), Hawes DJ(2), Clarke S(3)(4)(5), Kohn MR(3)(4)(5), Dar-Nimrod I(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia.
ywon8532@uni.sydney.edu.au.
(2)School of Psychology, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia.
(3)Brain Dynamics Centre, The Westmead Institute for Medical Research, The
University of Sydney, Westmead, Australia.
(4)Adolescent and Young Adult Medicine, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
(5)Centre for Research into Adolescents' Health (CRASH), Sydney, Australia.

Research on children and parents' experiences of ADHD has grown in recent years, 
attracting attention to their subjective perception of ADHD as a disorder.
Theoretical accounts of illness perception suggest that it is multi-dimensional, 
consisting of at least five core constructs (see the common-sense model of
illness representations or CSM: Leventhal et al., in: Rachman (ed) Medical
psychology, Pergamon, New York, vol 2, pp 7-30, 1980, in: Baum, Taylor, Singer
(eds) Handbook of psychology and health: social psychological aspects of health, 
Earlbaum, Hillsdale, vol 4, pp 219-252, 1984). We suggest that the application of
CSM in children/adolescents with ADHD and their parents may play an important
role in understanding their coping behavior, treatment adherence, and emotional
well-being. A systematic search identified 101 eligible studies that investigated
the perception of ADHD among diagnosed children/adolescents and their parents. In
general, these studies support the existence of the multiple facets of illness
representations proposed by the CSM in both diagnosed youngsters and parents
indicating substantial variability among both parents and youngsters on each of
these facets. The comprehensive assessment of the representations of ADHD
indicates imbalance attention to the different representations of ADHD in the
literature; disproportional research attention has been paid to the perceived
effectiveness of treatment (i.e., treatment control dimension) compared to other 
illness representations (e.g., timeline, consequence, and coherence), despite
research showing their relevance to treatment adherence among other implications.
The review identifies the limitation of existing relevant research, needed foci
for future studies, specific testable hypotheses, and potential clinical
implications of the multifaceted representations of ADHD among youngsters and
carers alike.

DOI: 10.1007/s10567-017-0245-2 
PMID: 29079900  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2018 Jan;256(1):163-171. doi:
10.1007/s00417-017-3800-0. Epub 2017 Oct 25.

WAGNER syndrome: anatomic, functional and genetic characterization of a
Portuguese family.

Araújo JR(1), Tavares-Ferreira J(2), Estrela-Silva S(2), Rocha P(2), Brandão
E(2), Faria PA(2)(3), Falcão-Reis F(2)(3), Rocha-Sousa A(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology Department, S. João Hospital, Porto, Portugal.
jrodriaraujo@gmail.com.
(2)Ophthalmology Department, S. João Hospital, Porto, Portugal.
(3)Department of Sense Organs, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.

PURPOSE: To report the clinical (anatomic and functional) and genetic findings of
Wagner Syndrome (WS) in a Portuguese family.
METHODS: Nine members of the family agreed to be examined. All had complete
clinical eye examinations. The proband and selected patients underwent color
fundus photography, spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT),
automatic static white-on-white computerized perimetry, and electrophysiology
assessment (flash ERG, multifocal(mf) ERG and dark adaptometry). A pedigree was
constructed based on interviews with known affected subjects. Genomic DNA samples
derived from venous blood were collected from all affected family members
examined.
RESULTS: Twenty-eight family members are affected. This family has the typical
features of Wagner Syndrome, namely an empty vitreous cavity with veils, mild
myopia and cataract. Four examined patients underwent vitreoretinal surgery due
to abnormal peripheral vitreoretinal adhesions with peripheral retinal traction
(n = 3). Retinal detachment was observed in 5 of the examined subjects. Four of
them occurred between the ages of 5 and 15 years. Chorioretinal atrophy is also a
frequent finding which results in moderate to severe visual field and advanced
rod-cone dystrophy from younger ages, also confirmed by absence of scotopic
function on dark adaptation. The macular dysfunction on mfERG was profound and of
early onset. A heterozygous mutation in intron 7 of the VCAN gene (c.4004-1G > A)
was found.
CONCLUSIONS: We described a rare autosomal dominant vitreoretinopathy with near
complete penetrance in a Portuguese family. Abnormal peripheral vitreoretinal
adhesions, retinal detachment and chorioretinal atrophy are present in most of
the examined individuals at young ages. Early onset of advanced visual field and 
electrophysiologic abnormalities were observed in this family. We also added
relevant information to the literature by reporting our experience in surgical
management of Wagner Syndrome patients with, and at risk of, retinal detachment.

DOI: 10.1007/s00417-017-3800-0 
PMID: 29071374  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Gesundheitswesen. 2018 Nov;80(11):1006-1012. doi: 10.1055/s-0043-117734. Epub
2017 Oct 11.

[Current Research Activities on Person-Centered Medicine in Academic Institutes
of General Practice in Germany and Austria].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Weber A(1), Schelling J(2), Kohls N(1), van Dyck M(2), Poggenburg S(3), Vajda
C(4), Hirsch J(5), Sirois F(6), Toussaint L(7), Offenbächer M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Gesundheitsförderung, Hochschule fur angewandte Wissenschaften
Coburg, Coburg.
(2)Institut für Allgemeinmedizin, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München,
München.
(3)Institut für Allgemeinmedizin und evidenzbasierte Versorgungsforschung,
Medizinische Universität Graz, Graz, Österreich.
(4)Klinik für Medizinische Psychologie und Psychotherapie, Medizinische
Universität Graz, Graz, Österreich.
(5)Department of Psychology, East Tennessee State University, Johnson City,
United States.
(6)Department of Psychology, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
(7)Luther College, Decorah, United States.
(8)Klinik und Poliklinik für Orthopädie, Physikalische Medizin und
Rehabilitation, Klinikum der Universität München.

AIM OF STUDY: Person-centered medicine (PCM) with its focus on
humanistic-biographical-oriented medicine and integrated, positive-salutogenic
health is a central aspect in the patient-physician relationship in general
practice. The objective of this analysis is to assess the prevalence and type of 
research project in academic institutions of general practice in Germany (Ger)
and Austria (At) and the thematic priorities of the projects in the areas PCM,
health promotion (HP), prevention (PRE) and conventional medicine (CM).
METHODS: A search was conducted (September-December 2015) on the websites of 30
institutes and divisions of general medicine for their current research projects.
The retrieved projects were assigned to five categories: PCM, HP, PRE, CM and
others. Subsequently, we identified the targeted patient groups of the projects
as well as the thematic focus in the categories PCM, HP, PRE and CM with focus on
PCM and HP.
RESULTS: 541 research projects were identified, 452 in Germany and 89 in Austria.
Research projects were only included if they were explicitly indicated as
research-oriented. Seventy projects addressed PCM aspects, 15 projects HP
aspects, 32 projects PRE aspects and 396 projects CM aspects. The most frequently
target groups in the categories PCM (24 of 70) and HP (7 of 15) were chronically 
ill patients. The most common thematic focus in PCM was communication (13 of 70) 
and in HP, physical activity (6 of 15).
CONCLUSION: The vast majority of research projects investigated conventional
medical topics. The percentage of research activities in the field of PCM (13%)
or PCM including HP (16%) in Ger and At is below the European average of 20%.
From our point of view, PCM and HP need to be implemented to a greater extent in 
general practice.

Publisher: Die personenzentrierte Medizin (PZM) mit Fokus auf einer
humanistisch-biografisch orientierten Medizin und einem erweiterten,
positiv-salutogenen Gesundheitsbegriff ist ein zentraler Bestandteil der
Arzt-Patienten Beziehung in der Allgemeinmedizin. Ziel dieser Analyse ist es
deshalb, Prävalenz und Typ von Forschungsprojekten in universitären Instituten
für Allgemeinmedizin in Deutschland (D) und Österreich (Ö) sowie deren
thematische Schwerpunkte in den Bereichen PZM, Gesundheitsförderung (GF),
Prävention (PRÄ) und konventioneller Medizin (KM) zu erfassen.Es wurde eine
Recherche auf den Webseiten von 30 Instituten für Allgemeinmedizin mit dem Fokus 
auf deren Forschungsprojekten im Zeitraum September–Dezember 2015 durchgeführt.
Die erfassten Projekte wurden in die 5 Kategorien PZM, GF, PRÄ, KM und sonstige
Themen eingeteilt. Anschließend erfolgte eine Identifikation der Zielgruppen und 
thematischen Schwerpunkte in den ersten 4 Kategorien, vertieft in den Bereichen
PZM und GF.Die Suche ergab insgesamt 541 Forschungsprojekte (FP), 452 in
Deutschland und 89 in Österreich. Es wurden nur FP erfasst, die ausdrücklich als 
solche gekennzeichnet waren. 70 FP untersuchten Aspekte der PZM, 15 FP Aspekte
der GF, 32 FP Aspekte der PRÄ und 395 FP Aspekte der konventionellen Medizin.
Chronisch kranke Patienten stellten in den beiden Kategorien PZM (24 von 70) und 
GF (7 von 15) die häufigste Zielgruppe dar. Häufigster thematischer Schwerpunkt
der PZM-Projekte war das Thema Kommunikation (13 von 70), bei den GF-Projekten
die körperliche Aktivität (6 von 15).Die Mehrzahl der Forschungsprojekte
beschäftigt sich mit konventionellen medizinischen Themen. Mit einem Anteil von
13% (PZM) bzw. 16% (PZM & GF) liegt die Forschungsaktivität im Bereich PZM bzw.
GF in D und Ö unter dem europäischen Durchschnitt von 20%. Um diese
Themenbereiche verstärkt in die hausärztliche Versorgung zu integrieren ist es
aus unserer Sicht notwendig u. a. die Forschung zu Voraussetzungen und Barrieren 
von PZM und GF im ärztlichen Alltag in Deutschland und Österreich zu vertiefen.
© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-117734 
PMID: 29020704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Die Autoren geben an, dass kein
Interessenkonflikt besteht.


449. Int J Methods Psychiatr Res. 2018 Mar;27(1). doi: 10.1002/mpr.1591. Epub 2017 Oct
8.

Is adjustment disorder unidimensional or multidimensional? Implications for
ICD-11.

Lorenz L(1), Hyland P(2), Perkonigg A(1), Maercker A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)School of Business, National College of Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.

In preparation for ICD-11, the adjustment disorder (AjD) diagnosis has undergone 
considerable revisions; however, the latent structure of AjD remains uncertain.
It is unclear whether AjD is best represented as a unidimensional or
multidimensional construct. This study performed a comprehensive assessment of
the latent structure of AjD symptomatology and assessed its concurrent and
discriminant validity. Individuals who experienced involuntary job loss (N = 333)
completed a self-report measure of AjD symptoms. Seven alternative models of AjD 
were tested using confirmatory factor analysis. General psychological distress,
impairment in social functioning, occupational self-efficacy, and sense of
coherence were used as criterion variables for construct validity. In the
confirmatory factor analysis, a bifactor solution with one dominant general AjD
factor and 5 correlated group factors (preoccupation, failure-to-adapt,
avoidance, affective reaction, and impulsivity) provided optimal fit. As
expected, the AjD factor showed strong positive associations with general
psychological distress and impairments in social functioning and moderately
negative associations with occupational self-efficacy and sense of coherence.
With regard to unidimensionality or multidimensionality of AjD symptoms, the
current results indicate the plausibility of a unidimensional conceptualization. 
Future research should focus on essential key characteristics and a reduction of 
symptoms for the AjD definition.

Copyright © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/mpr.1591 
PMCID: PMC6877110
PMID: 28990345  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Appetite. 2018 Jan 1;120:456-463. doi: 10.1016/j.appet.2017.10.005. Epub 2017 Oct
4.

Food stories: Unraveling the mechanisms underlying healthful eating.

Swan E(1), Bouwman L(2), Aarts N(3), Rosen L(4), Hiddink GJ(5), Koelen M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Health and Society Chair Group, Wageningen University, PO Box 8130, 6700EW
Wageningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: emily@eatallyourbroccoli.com.
(2)Health and Society Chair Group, Wageningen University, PO Box 8130, 6700EW
Wageningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: laura.bouwman@wur.nl.
(3)Institute for Science in Society (ISiS) Radboud University, P.O. Box 9010,
6500 GL Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: n.aarts@fnwi.ru.nl.
(4)Health and Society Chair Group, Wageningen University, PO Box 8130, 6700EW
Wageningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: leah.rosen@wur.nl.
(5)Strategic Communication Chair Group, Wageningen University, PO Box 8130,
6700EW Wageningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: gert.janhiddink@wur.nl.
(6)Health and Society Chair Group, Wageningen University, PO Box 8130, 6700EW
Wageningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: maria.koelen@wur.nl.

The biomedical model of health (BMH) studies the causes and origins of disease.
When applied to nutrition research, eating is studied as a behavior that supports
physical health. However, the lack of attention the BMH pays to social and
historical circumstances in which health behaviors are constructed has been
widely addressed in literature. When people are studied without considering
contextual influences, the relevance to everyday life is limited. As a result,
how individuals actively deal with their context to manage healthful eating is
poorly understood. This research applies a complementary model, salutogenic model
of health (SMH), and uses life course research methodology to study a group of
healthy eaters. The purpose of this research is to unravel how healthful eating
develops in everyday life. Healthy eaters (n = 17) were identified and recruited 
from the NQplus research panel at Wageningen University, the Netherlands. Life
course experiences were examined through narrative inquiry. Participants recalled
and visually explored life experiences with food and health using timelines.
Results indicate that healthful eating results from exposure to individual- and
context-bounded factors during childhood and adulthood and involves specific
mental and social capacities relevant to coping including amongst others,
critical self-awareness; flexibility, craftiness, and fortitude. Through
life-course learning moments, participants were able to develop proactive coping 
strategies which strengthened their sense of agency and helped them in overcoming
stressors and challenges. Findings show that nutrition strategies should not only
focus on strengthening food-specific factors like cooking skills and nutrition
knowledge, but other factors like stress management, empowerment, and
participation. Such factors support the development of adaptive skills and
behaviors, enable individuals to deal with the demands of everyday life, and are 
building blocks for health promotion.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.appet.2017.10.005 
PMID: 28987864  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Curr Opin Psychol. 2018 Jun;21:44-49. doi: 10.1016/j.copsyc.2017.09.005. Epub
2017 Sep 14.

A mentalization-based approach to common factors in the treatment of borderline
personality disorder.

Bateman A(1), Campbell C(2), Luyten P(3), Fonagy P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, University
College London, 1-19 Torrington Place, London WC1E 7HB, UK. Electronic address:
anthony.bateman@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Research Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, University
College London, 1-19 Torrington Place, London WC1E 7HB, UK.
(3)Research Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, University
College London, 1-19 Torrington Place, London WC1E 7HB, UK; Faculty of Psychology
and Educational Science, KU Leuven, Tiensestraat 102 PO Box 3722, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium.

In this paper we conceptualize borderline personality disorder as a disorder of
mentalizing, social cognition, and loss of resilience. Several treatment
approaches are effective, and meta-analyses suggest that there are few
substantive differences in effectiveness between them and between specialized and
non-specialized approaches. We propose that these findings arise because of
shared mechanisms of change, congruent with current thinking both about the
existence of a general 'p' factor of psychopathology and a reconceptualization of
personality disorders as involving a lack of resilience resulting from problems
with epistemic trust and salutogenesis, the capacity to derive benefit from the
social environment. Effective treatments share the characteristics of
consistency, coherence and continuity, qualities particularly relevant to
borderline personality disorder. They create the conditions for the reopening of 
epistemic trust, an essential component in therapeutic change, as it enables the 
individual to use the experience of being mentalized, to learn mentalizing of
others, and then apply and develop these experiences in day-to-day life, which is
the basis for meaningful therapeutic change.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.copsyc.2017.09.005 
PMID: 28985628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Schizophr Bull. 2018 Jun 6;44(4):778-786. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbx120.

Flourishing With Psychosis: A Prospective Examination on the Interactions Between
Clinical, Functional, and Personal Recovery Processes on Well-being Among
Individuals with Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders.

Chan RCH(1), Mak WWS(1), Chio FHN(1), Tong ACY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

Well-being is not just the absence of mental disorder but also involves positive 
feelings and contentment (emotional well-being), meaningful engagement
(psychological well-being), and contribution of one's community or society
(social well-being). Recovery processes, which encompass mitigation of clinical
symptomatology (clinical recovery), improvement in occupational, social, and
adaptive functioning (functional recovery), and development of personally valued 
goals and identity (personal recovery), have demonstrated to be important markers
of well-being. This study examined the relative contribution of clinical,
functional, and personal recovery processes on well-being among individuals with 
schizophrenia and explored the effect of personal recovery on people with varying
levels of symptom severity and functional ability. A longitudinal quantitative
research design was used in which 181 people with schizophrenia spectrum
disorders were assessed at baseline and 6 months. At baseline, 28.2% of the
participants were considered as flourishing. Around half of the participants
(52.5%) were moderately mentally healthy, while 19.3% were identified as
languishing. Results showed that clinical recovery was predictive of better
well-being at 6-month postbaseline. Personal recovery was found to positively
predict well-being, above and beyond the effects of clinical and functional
recovery. Moderation analysis showed that the effect of personal recovery on
well-being did not depend on clinical and functional recovery, which implied that
people with schizophrenia can participate in the process of personal recovery and
enjoy positive well-being regardless of their clinical stability and functional
competence. Given the robust salutogenic effect of personal recovery, greater
emphasis should be placed on developing person-centered, strength-based,
recovery-oriented services.

DOI: 10.1093/schbul/sbx120 
PMCID: PMC6007346
PMID: 28981851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Appl Psychol. 2018 Jan;103(1):1-13. doi: 10.1037/apl0000261. Epub 2017 Sep 21.

Attention to change: A multilevel theory on the process of emergent continuous
organizational change.

Wee EXM(1), Taylor MS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Foster School of Business, University of Washington.
(2)Robert H. Smith, School of Business, University of Maryland.

Increasingly, continuous organizational change is viewed as the new reality for
organizations and their members. However, this model of organizational change,
which is usually characterized by ongoing, cumulative, and substantive change
from the bottom up, remains underexplored in the literature. Taking a multilevel 
approach, the authors develop a theoretical model to explain the mechanisms
behind the amplification and accumulation of valuable, ongoing work-unit level
changes over time, which then become substantial changes at the organizational
level. Drawing on the concept of emergence, they first focus on the cognitive
search mechanisms of work-unit members and managers to illustrate how work-unit
level routine changes may be amplified to the organization through 2 unique
processes: composition and compilation emergence. The authors then discuss the
managers' role in creating a sense of coherence and meaning for the accumulation 
of these emergent changes over time. They conclude this research by discussing
the theoretical implications of their model for the existing literature of
organizational change. (PsycINFO Database Record

(c) 2018 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/apl0000261 
PMID: 28933908  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Crisis. 2018 Mar;39(2):137-143. doi: 10.1027/0227-5910/a000477. Epub 2017 Sep 15.

Problematizing Men's Suicide, Mental Health, and Well-Being.

Roy P(1), Tremblay G(2), Duplessis-Brochu É(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Social Work Teaching Unit, Université du Québec à Chicoutimi, QC, Canada.
(2)2 School of Social Work, Université Laval, QC, Canada.
(3)3 School of Social Work, Université de Montréal, QC, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The Province of Quebec, Canada (PQ), witnessed a drastic rise in
suicide among adult men between 1990 and 2000, followed by a continuous drop
since then. At the end of the 1990s, men's suicide became recognized as a social 
issue, leading to implementation of gender-responsive strategies focusing on
positive aspects of masculinity. Many of these strategies received positive
assessments.
AIMS: This article offers a critical overview of the evolution of social
responses to men's suicide in PQ.
METHOD: We highlight elements of success with examples of interventions targeting
men directly, professionals who work with men, and natural support networks of
men.
RESULTS: Results and discussion suggest the benefits to shift towards
salutogenic, gender-transformative approach to men's suicide prevention.
CONCLUSION: Closing remarks question the current gaps and upcoming challenges in 
suicide prevention among men.

DOI: 10.1027/0227-5910/a000477 
PMID: 28914093  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Clin Rehabil. 2018 Apr;32(4):536-545. doi: 10.1177/0269215517730670. Epub 2017
Sep 12.

The impact of self-perceived limitations, stigma and sense of coherence on
quality of life in multiple sclerosis patients: results of a cross-sectional
study.

Broersma F(1), Oeseburg B(2), Dijkstra J(3), Wynia K(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Health Sciences, Community and Occupational Medicine,
University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG), University of Groningen, Groningen,
The Netherlands.
(2)2 Wenckebach Institute, University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG), University
of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)3 Department of Sociology, Faculty of Behavioural and Social Sciences,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)4 Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG),
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the impact of perceived limitations, stigma and sense of
coherence on quality of life in multiple sclerosis patients.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional survey.
SETTING: Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen, the
Netherlands.
SUBJECTS: Multiple sclerosis patients.
MAIN MEASURES: World Health Organization Quality of Life - abbreviated version,
Stigma Scale for Chronic Illness, Sense of Coherence Scale, background and
disease-related questions.
RESULTS: In total, 185 patients (61% response rate) participated in the study
with moderate to severe limitations. Stigma was highly prevalent but low in
severity. Patients with a higher sense of coherence experienced a lower level of 
limitations ( B = -0.063, P < 0.01) and less stigma (enacted stigma B = -0.030, P
< 0.01; self-stigma B = -0.037, P < 0.01). Patients with a higher level of
limitations experienced more stigma (enacted stigma B = 0.044, P < 0.05;
self-stigma B = 0.063, P < 0.01). Patients with a higher sense of coherence
experienced better quality of life (physical health B = 0.059, P < 0.01;
psychological health B = 0.062, P < 0.01; social relationships B = 0.052, P <
0.01; environmental aspects B = 0.030, P < 0.01). Patients with a higher level of
limitations experienced poorer quality of life (physical health B = -0.364, P <
0.01; psychological health B = -0.089, P < 0.05) and patients with more stigma
also experienced poorer quality of life (self-stigma: physical health B = -0.073,
P < 0.01; psychological health B = -0.089, P < 0.01; social relationships B =
-0.124, P < 0.01; environmental aspects B = -0.052, P < 0.01, and enacted stigma:
physical health B = -0.085, P < 0.10).
CONCLUSION: Patients with less perceived limitations and stigma and a higher
level of sense of coherence experienced better quality of life. Patients with a
higher sense of coherence experienced a lower level of limitations and less
stigma.

DOI: 10.1177/0269215517730670 
PMCID: PMC5865470
PMID: 28895427  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Scand J Caring Sci. 2018 Jun;32(2):663-671. doi: 10.1111/scs.12492. Epub 2017 Sep
4.

Understanding the incomprehensible - patients' and spouses' experiences of
comprehensibility before, at and after diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis.

Ozanne A(1), Graneheim UH(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health and Care Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Nursing, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(3)Department of Health Sciences, University West, Trollhättan, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have examined manageability and meaningfulness in
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), but there is a lack of studies examining the
comprehensibility of ALS among patients and their spouses.
AIM: This qualitative retrospective study aimed to illuminate patients' and
spouses' experiences of comprehensibility in ALS from a long-term perspective,
when symptoms appeared before diagnosis, and when the diagnosis was given and in 
life after diagnosis.
METHODS: Individual semi-structured interviews with 14 patients and 13 spouses
were performed. The transcribed interviews were subjected to qualitative content 
analysis.
FINDINGS: Through the whole disease process, patients and spouses feared the
unknown regardless of whether they comprehended the disease or not. They
described that they before diagnosis felt uncertainty. It was problematic to
comprehend what was wrong and what the deterioration implied. At the diagnosis,
they described feelings of losing their foothold. Long-term after diagnosis, they
still lived in fear and looked for reasons why they were afflicted.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings of similar experiences in comprehensibility between
patients and spouses strengthen the importance of support and information to both
parties. Since they hovered between comprehensibility and incomprehensibility
during the whole disease process, it is important that their questions, fears and
worries are met, from the first visit at hospital and through the whole process. 
Multiprofessional teams, such as ALS teams and palliative teams can from a
holistic perspective increase the possibility of meeting their needs in their
unique situation.

© 2017 Nordic College of Caring Science.

DOI: 10.1111/scs.12492 
PMID: 28869647  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


457. AIDS Behav. 2018 Jun;22(6):1885-1898. doi: 10.1007/s10461-017-1874-7.

Relationships Between Illness Perception and Post-traumatic Growth Among Newly
Diagnosed HIV-Positive Men Who have Sex with Men in China.

Lau JTF(1)(2), Wu X(3)(4), Wu AMS(5), Wang Z(3)(6), Mo PKH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Health Behaviours Research, The Jockey Club School of Public Health
and Primary Care, Faculty of Medicine, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. jlau@cuhk.edu.hk.
(2)Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen,
China. jlau@cuhk.edu.hk.
(3)Centre for Health Behaviours Research, The Jockey Club School of Public Health
and Primary Care, Faculty of Medicine, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(4)Shenzhen Center for Chronic Disease Control, Shenzhen, China.
(5)Department of Psychology, Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Macau,
Macao, China.
(6)Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen,
China.

Newly diagnosed HIV-positive men who have sex with men (NHMSM) are at high risk
of mental health problems but may also develop post-traumatic growth (PTG).
According to the Common Sense Model, illness perception (including both cognitive
representation and emotional representation) affects coping and health-related
outcomes. A cross-sectional survey was conducted to examine the associations
between illness perception and PTG among 225 NHMSM in Chengdu, China. Linear
regression analyses indicated that the constructs of emotional representation
subscale (β = -0.49) and five cognitive representation subscales (timeline,
consequence, identity, attribution to god's punishment/will, and attribution to
chance/luck) (β = -0.13 to -0.37) were negative correlates of PTG, while four
other constructs of cognitive representation (coherence, treatment control,
personal control, and attribution to carelessness) were positive correlates
(β = 0.15 to 0.51). No moderating effects were observed. The associations between
five cognitive representation subscales and PTG were fully-mediated via emotional
representation. The results indicate that interventions promoting PTG among NHMSM
are warranted and should alter illness perception, emotional representation in
particular. Future studies should clarify relationships between cognitive
representation and emotional representation, and extend similar research to other
health-related outcomes and HIV-positive populations.

DOI: 10.1007/s10461-017-1874-7 
PMID: 28852886  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Scand J Public Health. 2018 Nov;46(7):711-717. doi: 10.1177/1403494817725466.
Epub 2017 Aug 19.

Validation of the Norwegian version of the work-related sense of coherence scale.

Grødal K(1)(2), Innstrand ST(1)(2), Bauer GF(3), Haugan G(1)(2), Rannestad
T(1)(2), André B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Public Health and Nursing, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Norway.
(2)2 NTNU Center for Health Promotion Research, Norway.
(3)3 Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Prevention Institute, University of Zurich, 
Switzerland.

AIM: The aim of this study was to investigate the psychometric properties of the 
Norwegian version of the work-related sense of coherence scale, which measures
the perceived comprehensibility, manageability, and meaningfulness of an
individual's current work situation.
METHODS: Factorial validity, convergent and discriminant validity of the factors,
as well as scale reliability were tested with confirmatory factor analyses among 
two samples of employees in higher education institutions ( N = 6951) and nursing
homes ( N = 558). Factorial invariance across occupational groups was also
investigated.
RESULTS: A modified three-factor structure was shown to be valid and reliable in 
both samples and invariant across occupational groups. However, problems were
detected regarding the discriminant validity between the factors
comprehensibility and manageability.
CONCLUSIONS: The Norwegian version of the work-related sense of coherence scale
seems to have good properties. Further development is needed to better
distinguish between the comprehensibility and manageability dimensions.

DOI: 10.1177/1403494817725466 
PMID: 28825350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Health Psychol. 2019 Jun;24(7):989-997. doi: 10.1177/1359105316687633. Epub
2017 Jan 17.

Preoperative sense of coherence associated with the 10-year outcomes of lumbar
spinal stenosis surgery.

Sinikallio S(1), Pakarinen M(1)(2), Tuomainen I(2), Airaksinen O(2), Viinamäki
H(1)(2), Aalto TJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 University of Eastern Finland, Finland.
(2)2 Kuopio University Hospital, Finland.
(3)3 Medical Center Ikioma, Finland.

A prospective 10-year follow-up study was conducted to determine the significance
of the preoperative sense of coherence, with respect to the preoperative and
10-year clinical characteristics, among lumbar spinal stenosis patients (
N = 99). In addition, the predictive value of the preoperative sense of coherence
regarding the 10-year surgery outcome was also evaluated. In a logistic
regression analysis, a weak preoperative sense of coherence and low functional
ability predicted the patients' functional ability 10 years after the surgery.
Moreover, those patients with weak sense of coherence before surgery showed
poorer functional ability 10 years after the surgery, but not preoperatively. A
weak preoperative sense of coherence seems to associate with poorer long-term
outcome after surgery; therefore, various rehabilitation strategies are
discussed.

DOI: 10.1177/1359105316687633 
PMID: 28810389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Scand J Caring Sci. 2018 Mar;32(1):430-440. doi: 10.1111/scs.12444. Epub 2017 Aug
14.

Validation of the Resilience Scale for Adolescents in Norwegian adolescents
13-18 years.

Moksnes UK(1)(2), Haugan G(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)NTNU Center for Health Promotion Research, Trondheim, Norway.
(2)Department of Public Health and Nursing, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Trondheim, Norway.

AIM: Resilience is seen as a vital resource for coping and mental health in
adolescents. However, there is no universally accepted theory or definition of
resilience, leading to considerable challenges regarding how to operationalise
and measure this construct. The study aimed at providing further knowledge of
the psychometric properties (dimensionality, construct validity and internal
consistency) of the 28-item version of the Resilience Scale for Adolescents
(READ) in N = 1183 Norwegian adolescents, 13-18 years old.
METHODS: Dimensionality of READ was tested using confirmatory factor analysis
(CFA). Convergent validity and reliability were tested using Pearson's
correlation analysis, Cronbach's alpha and composite reliability.
RESULTS: The CFA supported a modified, 20-item, five-factor structure with high
reliability, supporting the dimensionality and internal consistency of the
instrument. Convergent validity was confirmed where all factors correlated in
expected directions with measures of sense of coherence, self-esteem, stress and 
depression.
CONCLUSION: The psychometric properties of the READ need to be further evaluated 
in adolescents; however, the results indicate that a modified 20-item version of 
READ is adequate for assessing resilience in the present sample of Norwegian
adolescents.

© 2017 Nordic College of Caring Science.

DOI: 10.1111/scs.12444 
PMID: 28809052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Endocrinol Invest. 2018 Mar;41(3):307-314. doi: 10.1007/s40618-017-0741-8. Epub
2017 Aug 12.

Sense of coherence, self-esteem, and health locus of control in subjects with
type 1 diabetes mellitus with/without satisfactory metabolic control.

Nuccitelli C(1), Valentini A(1), Caletti MT(1), Caselli C(1)(2), Mazzella N(1),
Forlani G(1), Marchesini G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Metabolic Diseases and Clinical Dietetics, Department of Medical and
Surgical Sciences, Policlinico S. Orsola, Via Massarenti, 9, "Alma Mater
Studiorum" University, 40138, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Diabetes Unit, ASL Romagna, Ravenna, Italy.
(3)Unit of Metabolic Diseases and Clinical Dietetics, Department of Medical and
Surgical Sciences, Policlinico S. Orsola, Via Massarenti, 9, "Alma Mater
Studiorum" University, 40138, Bologna, Italy. giulio.marchesini@unibo.it.

BACKGROUND: Despite intensive training, a few individuals with Type 1 diabetes
mellitus (T1DM) fail to reach the desired metabolic targets.
AIM: To evaluate the association between disease-related emotional and cognitive 
aspects and metabolic control in subjects with T1DM.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Health locus of control (HLOC), sense of coherence (SOC),
and self-esteem were assessed in T1DM subjects using validated questionnaires.
Sixty-seven consecutive subjects who did not attain the desired HbA1c target
(mean HbA1c, 8.3% [67 mmol/mol]) were compared with 30 cases in satisfactory
metabolic control (HbA1c levels <7%-53 mmol/mol).
RESULTS: In the overall population, SOC was negatively associated with BMI and
average HbA1c, as was the association of self-esteem with HbA1c. Subjects
attaining the desired metabolic target were characterized by higher SOC scores,
higher Internal HLOC and prevalent Internal vs. Powerful-others HLOC. Compared to
subjects in good metabolic control, subjects with unsatisfactory control had
lower scores of SOC, Internal HLOC and Self-esteem, with no difference in
Powerful others, or Chance HLOC. In the same group, SOC in the upper tertile was 
significantly associated with self-esteem (OR 1.35; 95% CI 1.08-1.69) and PHLOC
(OR 1.24; 95% CI 1.03-1.49), after adjustment for age, sex, educational level,
and comorbidities.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients who fail to reach a satisfactory metabolic control tend to 
rely on significant others, trusting in the physicians' skills or on the
efficiency of the health-care system. Strategies aimed at increasing
self-efficacy and SOC, based on personal ability, are eagerly awaited to help
patients improve diabetes care.

DOI: 10.1007/s40618-017-0741-8 
PMID: 28803346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Sex Marital Ther. 2018 Feb 17;44(2):213-220. doi:
10.1080/0092623X.2017.1354343. Epub 2017 Aug 11.

Interpersonal Sensitivity as a Mediator Between Cumulative Childhood Traumatic
Events and Adult Sexual Disturbance.

Krammer S(1), Grosse Holtforth M(2)(3), Burri A(4)(5), Soyka M(6)(7)(8), Gamma
A(1), Liebrenz M(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Forensic Psychiatric Services, Institute for Legal Medicine , University of 
Bern , Bern , Switzerland.
(2)b Kompetenzzentrum Psychosomatic , Inselspital , Bern , Switzerland.
(3)c Institute for Psychology , University of Bern , Bern , Switzerland.
(4)d Health and Rehabilitation Research Institute , Auckland University of
Technology , Auckland , New Zealand.
(5)e Waitemata Pain Service, Department of Anaesthesia and Perioperative Medicine
, North Shore Hospital , Auckland , New Zealand.
(6)f Privatklinik Meiringen , Meiringen , Switzerland.
(7)g Psychiatric Clinic , University of Munich , Germany.
(8)h Medical Park Chiemseeblick , Bernau , Germany.

Previous research has shown that cumulative childhood traumatic events are
stronger predictors of sexual disturbances than childhood sexual abuse.
Additional factors are likely to influence this relationship. Whereas
socio-interpersonal factors such as interpersonal sensitivity have repeatedly
been shown to be salutogenic in the aftermath of traumatic events, the specific
underlying mechanisms are little understood. The aim of the present study was to 
examine the relationship between cumulative childhood traumatic events and adult 
sexual disturbances (i.e., the avoidance of sexual contacts, disruptive sexual
behavior, poor sexual boundaries, decreased regulation of sexual impulses) and to
investigate the role of interpersonal sensitivity as a potential mediator. The
sample comprised 100 adult psychiatric in-patients. As expected, cumulative
childhood traumatic events were found to be strong predictors of sexual
disturbances, with interpersonal sensitivity partially mediating this
relationship.

DOI: 10.1080/0092623X.2017.1354343 
PMID: 28799846  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Aging Ment Health. 2018 Nov;22(11):1438-1447. doi: 10.1080/13607863.2017.1364348.
Epub 2017 Aug 11.

Evaluation of the revised Sense of Coherence scale in a sample of older adults: A
means to assess resilience aspects.

Mc Gee SL(1)(2), Höltge J(1)(2), Maercker A(1)(2), Thoma MV(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Psychopathology and Clinical Intervention , Institute of Psychology,
University of Zürich , Zürich , Switzerland.
(2)b University Research Priority Program "Dynamics of Healthy Aging", University
of Zürich , Zürich , Switzerland.

OBJECTIVES: The present study evaluated the revised Sense of Coherence (SOC-R)
scale in a sample of older adults, using an extended range of psychological
concepts. It further examined the psychometric properties of the revised scale
and tested the theoretical assumptions underpinning the SOC-R concept.
METHOD: The SOC-R scale was evaluated in 268 Swiss older adults (mean age = 66.9 
years), including n = 15 heavily traumatized former indentured child labourers.
Standardised questionnaires collected information on positive and negative life
experiences, resources, current health, and well-being.  Results: Confirmatory
Factor Analysis indicated good model fit for a second-order three-factor model of
SOC-R with the factors manageability, balance, and reflection. Satisfactory
convergent and discriminant correlations were shown with related psychological
concepts, including neuroticism (r = -.32, p < .01), optimism (r = .31, p < .01),
and general self-efficacy (r = .49, p < .01). SOC-R was not observed to differ by
age group. Moderation analyses indicated that SOC-R moderated the relationship
between certain early-life adversities and mental health.
CONCLUSION: The study provides support for the psychometric properties and
theoretical assumptions of SOC-R and suggests that SOC-R is a valid and reliable 
measure suitable for use with older adults. Future studies should employ
longitudinal designs to examine the stability of SOC-R.

DOI: 10.1080/13607863.2017.1364348 
PMID: 28799415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Colorectal Dis. 2018 Feb;20(2):126-133. doi: 10.1111/codi.13836.

Timely access to care in the treatment of rectal cancer and the effect on quality
of life.

Walming S(1), Block M(2), Bock D(1), Angenete E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy at 
University of Gothenburg, SSORG - Scandinavian Surgical Outcomes Research Group, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska University 
Hospital/Östra, Gothenburg, Sweden.

AIM: The aim of this study was to investigate if a delay in a patient's first
contact with a healthcare professional, and any subsequent delay in diagnosis,
affected self-assessed quality of life prior to start of treatment for rectal
cancer.
METHOD: Questionnaires were administered when patients had been informed of the
diagnosis and planned treatment. The primary end-point was self-assessed quality 
of life according to a seven-point Likert scale. The response variables were
dichotomized and analysed by unadjusted and adjusted binary logistic regression.
RESULTS: A reported duration of symptoms longer than 4 months was found to be
associated with a lower quality of life than a reported duration of symptoms of
less than 3 months. Furthermore, a reported period of longer than 2 months from
first contact with a healthcare professional to a diagnosis was found to
correlate with lower quality of life compared with a period shorter than
2 months. However, when adjusting for possible confounding variables the duration
of symptoms and time to diagnosis were not found to affect self-assessed quality 
of life. Several variables were found to have significant influence in the
statistical model, including sense of coherence, the presence of negative
intrusive thoughts, comorbidity, depressed mood, male sex and comorbidity.
CONCLUSION: One conclusion of our study is that further efforts to shorten delay 
in rectal cancer care with the aim of improving quality of life may be futile. To
improve the patient's quality of life at diagnosis other interventions should be 
considered, such as screening for depression and/or negative intrusive thoughts.

© 2017 The Authors. Colorectal Disease published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on
behalf of Association of Coloproctology of Great Britain and Ireland.

DOI: 10.1111/codi.13836 
PMID: 28777877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2018 Jan;18(1):154-160. doi: 10.1111/ggi.13141. Epub 2017
Jul 28.

Family relations, sense of coherence, happiness and perceived health in retired
Taiwanese: Analysis of a conceptual model.

Chiang HH(1), Lee TS(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Health Promotion and Health Education, National Taiwan Normal
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

AIM: A growing awareness of the rapidly increasing aged population in the world
has led to growing attention to mental health in late life. Happiness has been
emphasized as an important indicator of physical health and is predicted by a
sense of coherence. However, the mechanism of influence of family relations on
sense of coherence, happiness and perceived health is unknown. The present study 
aimed to analyze a conceptual model of the relationships among family relations, 
sense of coherence, happiness and perceived health in retired persons.
METHODS: A total of 142 retired participants were recruited from social service
centers in Taipei, Taiwan. A structured questionnaire measuring the relationships
among family relations, sense of coherence, happiness and perceived health was
filled in by each respondent. Data were analyzed using structural equation
modeling.
RESULTS: The results showed that family relations is positively correlated with
happiness, sense of coherence and perceived health. The results also showed that 
good family relations and a sense of coherence predict greater happiness. The
results from structure equation modeling showed that the relationship between
family relations and perceived health is completely mediated by happiness and a
sense of coherence, but only the indirect effect of happiness is significant. The
results also showed that family relations is partially mediated by the sense of
coherence to happiness.
CONCLUSIONS: In caring for retired older people, medical professionals need to
increase their family relations and sense of coherence simultaneously, and then
promote happiness in their interventions. Geriatr Gerontol Int 2018; 18: 154-160.

© 2017 Japan Geriatrics Society.

DOI: 10.1111/ggi.13141 
PMID: 28753239  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Glob Health Promot. 2019 Sep;26(3):15-22. doi: 10.1177/1757975917715884. Epub
2017 Jul 21.

The influence of fatalistic beliefs on health beliefs among diabetics in
Khartoum, Sudan: a comparison between Coptic Christians and Sunni Muslims.

Hag Hamed D(1), Daniel M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Health Promotion, University of Bergen, Norway.

Although there are many studies assessing the influence of religious beliefs on
health they do not agree on whether the impact is positive or negative. More so, 
there is no consensus in the available literature on the definition of fatalism
and what it means to individuals. In this phenomenological study we attempt to
define what religious fatalism means to people living with diabetes in Khartoum, 
and how it affects their health beliefs, and how those beliefs affect their sense
of coherence and generalized resistance resources, since salutogenesis is the
guiding theory in this study. Three Copts and five Sunnis living with diabetes
were interviewed, as well as a Coptic clergyman and a Sunni scholar. The
semi-structured interviews were recorded and transcribed verbatim for analysis.
Thematic network analysis was used to code salient concepts into basic themes,
organizing themes and global themes. The empirical findings are thus structured
as the three global themes: (1) fatalism and free will; (2) health
responsibility; (3) acceptance and coping. Fatalism was defined as events beyond 
an individual's control where it is then the individual's free will to seek
healthy behavior. Thus health responsibility was stressed upon by the
participants in this study as well as the clergyman and scholar. There is also
the concept of 'God doesn't give one what one cannot handle' that the
participants relate to coping and acceptance. This study finds that the meaning
of religious fatalism held by participants and religious clergy is not
disempowering. The participants believe that they are responsible for their
health. The meaning derived from fatalism is related to how they can accept what 
is beyond their control and cope with their health condition. Religious fatalism 
contributed to comprehensibility, manageability and meaningfulness in our
participants' response to diabetes.

DOI: 10.1177/1757975917715884 
PMID: 28730875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Scand J Public Health. 2018 May;46(3):375-381. doi: 10.1177/1403494817720103.
Epub 2017 Jul 19.

Good work ability among unemployed individuals: Association of sociodemographic, 
work-related and well-being factors.

Hult M(1), Pietilä AM(1)(2), Koponen P(3), Saaranen T(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Faculty of Health Sciences, Department of Nursing Science, University of
Eastern Finland, Finland.
(2)2 Kuopio Social and Health Care Services, Finland.
(3)3 Department of Health, Health Monitoring Unit, National Institute of Health
and Welfare, Finland.

AIMS: The aims of this study were to describe the perceived work ability of
unemployed individuals and to explore the association between perceived good work
ability and sociodemographic, work-related and well-being factors.
METHODS: The data were derived from the Finnish Regional Health and Well-being
Study (ATH) collected by postal and Internet-based questionnaires in 2014-2015.
The random sample was selected from the Finnish National Population Register. The
present study includes data from unemployed or laid-off respondents ( n=1975)
aged 20-65 years. Logistic regression was used in the statistical analysis.
Perceived work ability was measured with the Work Ability Score.
RESULTS: Factors significantly associated with good work ability were having
young children living in the household, short-term unemployment, low or moderate 
physical strain in most recent job, moderate mental strain in most recent job,
satisfaction with most recent job, good self-rated health and good quality of
life. Good self-rated health (odds ratio=10.53, 95% confidence interval
5.90-18.80) was the most substantial factor in the multivariate model.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings provide further evidence on the factors related to good
work ability of the unemployed. These factors should be considered when designing
interventions for promoting work ability and to minimise the harmful effects of
long-term unemployment.

DOI: 10.1177/1403494817720103 
PMID: 28720022  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Scand J Caring Sci. 2018 Jun;32(2):690-697. doi: 10.1111/scs.12498. Epub 2017 Jul
12.

Health promotion in specialist and community care: how a broadly applicable
health promotion intervention influences patient's sense of coherence.

Heggdal K(1), Lovaas BJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lovisenberg Diaconal University College, Oslo, Norway.
(2)VID Specialized University, Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Chronic illness health interventions aim to strengthen individuals'
wellness resources, in addition to their ability to handle their condition. This 
presupposes a partnership between patients and professionals and flexibility in
care organization.
AIM: This study aims to investigate possible changes in individuals' sense of
coherence while living with long-term illness as they engage in a broadly
applicable health promotion intervention developed in specialist care settings
that was later implemented in the community care context.
METHOD: This study had a pre-postdesign. Sense of coherence was measured using
the SOC-29 questionnaire at baseline and within 14 days of programme completion. 
The total baseline sample included 108 Norwegian adults (aged 21-89) with chronic
illness. Data were analysed using paired samples t-tests.
RESULTS: In both clinical sites, the total sample's mean SOC score changed
positively from the baseline to the follow-up 4 months later. This change was
larger for the participants in the community care context. Manageability
increased significantly for women. Significant positive changes in SOC score and 
the manageability dimension were also identified among participants who had
children. Similar findings were found for those who were living with a partner,
as well as for public transfer payment recipients.
CONCLUSION: The intervention contributed to a positive change in participants'
SOC while living with illness. The findings revealed that the intervention is a
flexible health promotion tool across age, diagnostic categories and clinical
sites. The community participants' SOC changed the most, which indicates that the
intervention is especially relevant in the follow-up of persons living with
long-term illness within the community. The intervention contributes to a shift
of perspectives in health care towards strenght-based care and health within
illness.

© 2017 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Caring Sciences published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Nordic College of Caring Science.

DOI: 10.1111/scs.12498 
PMID: 28699654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Gac Sanit. 2018 Jul - Aug;32(4):324-326. doi: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2017.03.005. Epub 
2017 May 31.

Seizing the opportunity - a salutogenic approach to public health.

Lindstrom B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Nursing Science, Norwegian University of
Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway. Electronic address:
bengtblind@hotmail.com.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2017.03.005 
PMID: 28576613 


470. Cancer Nurs. 2018 Nov/Dec;41(6):463-472. doi: 10.1097/NCC.0000000000000504.

Providing Coordinated Cancer Care-A Qualitative Study of Norwegian Cancer
Coordinators' Experiences of Their Role.

Lie NK(1), Hauken MA, Solvang PK.

Author information: 
(1)Author Affiliations: Department of Physiotherapy, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Oslo and Akershus University College of Applied Sciences (Ms Lie and Dr Solvang);
and Center for Crisis Psychology, Bergen (Dr Hauken), Norway.

BACKGROUND: There is a growing need for strategies to improve coordinated,
tailored services in cancer care to meet the comprehensive needs of cancer
patients. In Norway, cancer coordinators (CCs) have been established to improve
coordination and patient-centeredness of services. Little is known about how CCs 
engage to provide patients with the needed services and support throughout the
treatment.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to explore how Norwegian CCs experience
their role and how they enact it in order to enhance coordinated cancer care.
METHODS: The study encompasses a qualitative, hermeneutic approach, conducting
semistructured in-depth interviews of 26 Norwegian CCs. The data were analyzed
using thematic analysis and discussed in the light of the salutogenic theory.
RESULTS: Cancer coordinators take a holistic approach to patient care, including 
both patient- and system-level activities. "Providing coordinated cancer care"
emerged as an overarching topic for their role. This topic was elaborated by 3
main themes: (1) finding their place and creating their function, (2) meeting the
needs of cancer patients and helping them cope, (3) promoting well-functioning
cancer care systems.
CONCLUSIONS: Cancer coordinators evolved diversely, in adaption to the local
context and patients' needs. The functions' diversity challenged the
implementation and external role recognition. Cancer coordinators seemed to apply
a salutogenic, resource-focused orientation in order to support a positive
development at both the patient and the system levels.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: The findings reinforce the call for holistic,
patient-centered services in cancer care. Cancer coordinators need appropriate
support from the local management to establish the role and local collaborations.

DOI: 10.1097/NCC.0000000000000504 
PMID: 28537952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Disabil Rehabil. 2018 Aug;40(17):2093-2097. doi: 10.1080/09638288.2017.1323234.
Epub 2017 May 5.

Commitment to physical activity and health: a case study of a Paralympic Gold
medallist.

Kean B(1)(2), Oprescu F(2), Gray M(2), Burkett B(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Centre of Excellence for Applied Sport Science Research, Queensland Academy 
of Sport , Brisbane , Australia.
(2)b School of Health and Sport Sciences, Faculty of Science, Health, Education
and Engineering , University of the Sunshine Coast , Sippy Downs , Australia.

BACKGROUND: Physical activity has been documented as both beneficial and
detrimental for individuals with multiple sclerosis (MS). The varied experience
highlights challenges associated with physical activity and MS, requiring a
greater understanding of the experiences of exercise for individuals with MS.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to explore how physical activity played 
a role in the life of a Paralympic Gold medallist. Carol was diagnosed with MS
and went onto achieve the highest accolade in Paralympic sport.
METHODS: Narrative inquiry, within a single-case design, explored how physical
activity played a role in Carol's life. The narrative was analysed through the
lens of a salutogenic framework, which explores how individuals create health
despite adverse circumstances.
FINDINGS: Carol's physical activity pathway explores life before and after her
diagnosis, motivations to return to exercise and pathway to Paralympic Gold.
Carol's experiences highlight how physical activity played a role during various 
stages of her life. Exercise had a significant role in Carol's life prior to
diagnosis, it assisted in the management of MS and she cycled the elite level,
winning a Paralympic Gold medal in para-cycling. Implications for Rehabilitation 
Physical activity has been reported as beneficial for multiple sclerosis
management; however, there can be a fine line between the benefits and an
overload that can harm. An elite athlete with multiple sclerosis maintained and
sustained physical activity to the highest level in elite sport, incorporating a 
positive health outlook throughout different stages of her life. The case
highlights how commitment and self-awareness of capabilities and limits may be
useful self-management tools in increasing physical activity for individuals
living with multiple sclerosis.

DOI: 10.1080/09638288.2017.1323234 
PMID: 28475409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Scand J Caring Sci. 2018 Mar;32(1):186-196. doi: 10.1111/scs.12446. Epub 2017 Apr
20.

Unravelling Swedish informal caregivers' Generalised Resistance Deficits.

Wennerberg MMT(1)(2), Eriksson M(3), Lundgren SM(1), Danielson E(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health and Care Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Homecare Health and Nursing, Municipality of Orust, Ellös,
Sweden.
(3)Center on Salutogenesis, Department of Health Sciences, University West,
Trollhättan, Sweden.
(4)Department of Nursing, Mid Sweden University, Östersund, Sweden.

In salutogenic theory, individual/contextual, immaterial/material characteristics
enabling movements towards health are labelled Specific and Generalised
Resistance Resources, SRRs/GRRs, and characteristics counteracting such movements
Specific and Generalised Resistance Deficits, SRDs/GRDs. The aim of this paper
was to present SRDs and GRDs described by caregivers as stemming from themselves 
and their care recipient. Guided by salutogenic theory, an explorative design was
used to collect data through interviews with 32 Swedish informal caregivers.
During the theory-driven analysis, SRDs were unravelled using within-case
approaches. To be able to unite them as GRDs across cases, a serviceable GRD
definition was developed from the existing theoretical GRR definition. In
findings, SRDs are visualised in citations and GRDs described in detail.
Caregivers' experiences of SRDs/GRDs are presented as themes: 'Experiencing
personal deficiencies', when stemming from themselves; and 'Struggling with an
uncooperative co-worker', when stemming from their care recipients. Findings
indicate that if these themes dominate a caregiver's view of life, she/he seems
to have reached the 'breaking point' when caregiving ends due to lack of usable
SRRs/GRRs. To prolong the time until this occurs, support, making otherwise
unusable SRRs/GRRs usable, is needed. When designing this type of 'salutogenic'
support, it seems essential to involve the target group (e.g. caregivers, care
recipients), to ascertain what their SRRs/GRRs and SRDs/GRDs may consist of. Such
knowledge regarding SRRs/SRDs could be used to design individualised support, and
regarding GRRs/GRDs to design generalised support at group level. This study
suggests how such new knowledge regarding resistance resources and deficits could
be acquired.

© 2017 Nordic College of Caring Science.

DOI: 10.1111/scs.12446 
PMID: 28425120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 2018 Mar/Apr;33(2):E7-E15. doi:
10.1097/HTR.0000000000000307.

The Association Between Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Perceptions of
Deployment-Related Injury in Veterans With and Without Mild Traumatic Brain
Injury.

Bahraini NH(1), Monteith LL, Gerber HR, Forster JE, Hostetter TA, Brenner LA.

Author information: 
(1)Rocky Mountain Mental Illness Research, Education and Clinical Center,
Department of Veterans Affairs, Denver, Colorado (Drs Bahraini, Monteith,
Forster, and Brenner and Mss Gerber and Hostetter); and Department of Psychiatry 
(Drs Bahraini, Monteith, and Brenner), Department of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation (Drs Bahraini, Forster and Brenner), and Department of Neurology
(Dr Brenner), University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora.

OBJECTIVES: To examine whether the association between posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) and injury perceptions (ie, consequences, emotional
representations, and coherence) differs for Veterans with mild traumatic brain
injury (mTBI) compared with Veterans with non-TBI (ie, orthopedic).
PARTICIPANTS: Eighty Veterans injured during post-9/11 deployments.
DESIGN: Observational, 2×2 factorial design.
MAIN MEASURES: Injury histories ascertained using the Ohio State University
TBI-Identification Method and Deployment Injury Questionnaire; Injury Perception 
Questionnaire-Revised (injury perceptions); Structured Clinical Interview for the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (PTSD
diagnosis); and PTSD Symptom Checklist-Civilian Version (PTSD symptoms).
RESULTS: The association between PTSD diagnosis and injury perceptions did not
differ between Veterans with mTBI and those with non-TBIs, adjusting for age,
subjective pain, and depressive symptoms. PTSD symptom severity was significantly
associated with injury consequences (P < .0001) and emotional representations (P 
< .0001), irrespective of injury type (mTBI vs non-TBI). Only injury coherence
was associated with a significant interaction between PTSD symptom severity and
mTBI (P = .04).
CONCLUSION: PTSD symptom severity influences perceptions about mTBI and non-TBIs 
sustained during deployment. Altering injury perceptions may be an important
treatment target for Veterans with co-occurring PTSD and deployment-related
injuries.

DOI: 10.1097/HTR.0000000000000307 
PMID: 28422900  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Investig Clin Dent. 2018 Feb;9(1). doi: 10.1111/jicd.12264. Epub 2017 Apr 6.

Predictors of oral health-related quality of life in Iranian adolescents: A
prospective study.

Pakpour AH(1)(2)(3), Lin CY(4), Kumar S(5), Fridlund B(6), Jansson H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Social Determinants of Health Research Center, Qazvin University of Medical
Sciences, Qazvin, Iran.
(2)Department of Nursing, School of Health and Welfare, Jönköping University,
Jönköping, Sweden.
(3)Department of Natural Science and Biomedicine, School of Health and Welfare,
Jönköping University, Jönköping, Sweden.
(4)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
Hung Hom, Hong Kong.
(5)Griffith Health Institute, School of Dentistry and Oral Health, Gold Coast,
QLD, Australia.
(6)School of Health and Welfare, Jönköping University, Jönköping, Sweden.

AIM: In the present study, we evaluated the direct and mediating (indirect)
effects of clinical oral conditions, dental anxiety, sense of coherence (SOC),
and socioeconomic variables on oral health-related quality of life (OHRQoL) and
general health-related quality of life (GHRQoL) in Iranian adolescents.
METHODS: A longitudinal design was used with a sample of 1052 (694 males, mean
age=15.05 years) schoolchildren from Qazvin, Iran. Each participant completed a
background information sheet and the following scales at baseline: Modified
Dental Anxiety Scale, SOC, PedsQL 4.0 Generic Core Scale, and PedsQL Oral Health 
Scale. The PedsQL 4.0 Generic Core and Oral Health scales were recompleted at the
18-mo follow up.
RESULTS: Father's education, monthly family income, dental anxiety, Community
Periodontal Index (CPI), decayed, missing, and filled teeth (DMFT), and SOC
significantly and directly predicted OHRQoL at 18 mo. Father's education had
indirect effects on OHRQoL through CPI and DMFT, family income had indirect
effects through DMFT, and dental anxiety had indirect effects through CPI. OHRQoL
at 18 mo (β=0.499) and SOC (β=0.084) had significant and direct and mediating
effects through OHRQoL on GHRQoL, while father's education, monthly family
income, dental anxiety, CPI, and DMFT only showed mediating effects.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical oral indicators had direct effects on OHRQoL, but mediated 
the effects of dental anxiety and socioeconomic status on both OHRQoL and GHRQoL.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jicd.12264 
PMID: 28386989  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Glob Health Promot. 2019 Mar;26(1):60-68. doi: 10.1177/1757975917691925. Epub
2017 Apr 6.

Factors promoting sense of coherence among university students in urban areas of 
Japan: individual-level social capital, self-efficacy, and mental health.

Mato M(1), Tsukasaki K(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Health Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kanazawa
University, Japan.
(2)2 Faculty of Health Sciences, Institute of Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health 
Sciences, Kanazawa University, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Sense of coherence (SOC) is a concept that helps to explain the
relation between personal intentionality as psychosocial factors and
health-related behaviors. Thus, it is essential to enhance SOC when encouraging a
healthy lifestyle. However, the factors that promote SOC have not been fully
investigated among university students. The objective of this study was to
clarify the general resistance resources (GRRs) that may promote the development 
of the SOC among university students. Therefore, we examined the relationship
between SOC and social capital (SC), self-efficacy, and mental health.
METHODS: Participants included 443 students from nine academic departments at
eight universities in the Kanto or Kinki metropolitan areas of Japan.
Participants completed an anonymous questionnaire. Individual-level cognitive and
structural SC, generalized self-efficacy, mental health inventory (from SF-36v2),
and SOC were measured. Confirmatory factor analysis using structural equation
modeling was conducted to verify the factor structure of the SOC-13 scale.
Stepwise multiple regression analysis and two-way layout analysis of variance
were performed with SOC as the dependent variable.
RESULTS: The factor structure of SOC indicated the optimal model fit in the
second-order three-factor model of the 12 items. SOC was predicted by five
variables: age, cognitive SC, structural SC, mental health, and self-efficacy.
For students from urban areas, SOC was predicted by the interaction between
cognitive and structural SC.
CONCLUSION: SOC was significantly related to cognitive SC, structural SC, and
self-efficacy as well as mental health in university students from urban areas.
Furthermore, the combination of higher-level cognitive SC and higher-level
structural SC exerted an inhibitory influence on SOC among students who
previously and currently live in urban areas. Therefore, the findings indicated
that both cognitive and structural SC as well as self-efficacy may act as GRRs
that promote the development of SOC, and similarly, good mental health may
promote a strong SOC.

DOI: 10.1177/1757975917691925 
PMID: 28382845  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


476. J Women Aging. 2018 Sep-Oct;30(5):366-381. doi: 10.1080/08952841.2017.1301720.
Epub 2017 Apr 4.

Resistance training is linked to heightened positive motivational state and lower
negative affect among healthy women aged 65-70.

Ericson H(1), Skoog T(2)(3), Johansson M(1), Wåhlin-Larsson B(1).

Author information: 
(1)a School of Health Sciences, Örebro University , Örebro , Sweden.
(2)b School of Law, Psychology, and Social Work, Örebro University , Örebro ,
Sweden.
(3)c Department of Psychology , University of Gothenburg , Göteborg , Sweden.

Resistance training (RT) improves overall health, but the psychological effects
of RT in healthy old adults have not been tested. The aim of this study was to
investigate a sample of 65-70-year-old healthy and physically active women to
assess their sense of coherence, health-related quality of life, hope, and
affect, before and after taking part in a 24-week RT intervention (N = 14),
compared to controls (N = 18). Findings showed a significant increase in hope
(p = 0.013) and a significant decrease in negative affect (p = 0.002). Starting
RT after age 65 does not appear to negatively impact on women's psychological
health but seems to be associated with important psychological health benefits.

DOI: 10.1080/08952841.2017.1301720 
PMID: 28375777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Disabil Rehabil. 2018 Jul;40(14):1671-1678. doi: 10.1080/09638288.2017.1306588.
Epub 2017 Mar 30.

Exploring change in a group-based psychological intervention for multiple
sclerosis patients.

Borghi M(1)(2), Bonino S(2)(3), Graziano F(2), Calandri E(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Regional Referral Multiple Sclerosis Centre (CRESM) - 'San Luigi Gonzaga'
Hospital , Orbassano , Italy , Torino.
(2)b Cosso Foundation , Pinerolo , Italy , Torino.
(3)c Department of Psychology , University of Torino , Italy.

PURPOSE: The study is focused on a group-based cognitive behavioral intervention 
aimed at promoting the quality of life and psychological well-being of multiple
sclerosis patients. The study investigates how the group intervention promoted
change among participants and fostered their adjustment to the illness.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The intervention involved six groups of patients (a total 
of 41 patients) and included four consecutive sessions and a 6-month follow-up.
To explore change, verbatim transcripts of the intervention sessions were
analyzed using a mixed-methods content analysis with qualitative data combined
with descriptive statistics. The categories of resistance and openness to change 
were used to describe the process of change.
RESULTS: Resistance and openness to change coexisted during the intervention.
Only in the first session did resistance prevail over openness to change;
thereafter, openness to change gradually increased and stabilized over time, and 
openness to change was then always stronger than resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: The study builds on previous research on the effectiveness of
group-based psychological interventions for multiple sclerosis patients and gives
methodological and clinical suggestions to health care professionals working with
multiple sclerosis patients. Implications for rehabilitation The study suggests
that a group-based cognitive behavioral intervention for multiple sclerosis
patients focused on the promotion of identity redefinition, a sense of coherence 
and self-efficacy in dealing with multiple sclerosis fosters the process of
change and may be effective in promoting patients' adjustment to their illness.
Health care professionals leading group-based psychological interventions for
multiple sclerosis patients should be aware that resistance and openness to
change coexist in the process of change. The study suggests that the duration of 
the intervention is a crucial factor: a minimum of three sessions appears to be
necessary for group participants to develop greater openness to change and
follow-up sessions should be implemented to maintain positive changes among
participants. The use of qualitative instruments to evaluate group interventions 
captures the complexity of processes and gives useful indications to health
professionals to improve rehabilitation programs.

DOI: 10.1080/09638288.2017.1306588 
PMID: 28355925  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Klin Monbl Augenheilkd. 2018 Aug;235(8):905-926. doi: 10.1055/s-0042-123833. Epub
2017 Mar 10.

[Choroidal Neovascularisation Other than Typical Neovascular Age-Related Macular 
Degeneration].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Sandner D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Augenheilkunde, Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav
Carus, TU Dresden.

Choroidal neovascularisation (CNV) in the context of exsudative age-related
macular degeneration (nAMD) can be divided into type 1 (occult) and type 2
(classical) membranes. Retinal angiomatous proliferation (RAP) or polypoidal
choroidal vasculopathy (PCV) are "rare subtypes" of chorioretinal
neovascularisation and are distinguished by their distinct morphology and the
sometimes worse response to therapy. Chorioretinal anastomosis, severe exsudates 
with serosanguinous pigment epithelial detachment and, in PCV, orange-red lesions
in the papillomacular bundle can be diagnostic. Indocyanine green angiography
(ICGA) is considered the gold standard for diagnosis of PCV and delivers
important information for RAP too. Typical characteristics of PCV include foci of
hyperfluoresence, with pulsatile filling in the early phase. This characterises
choroidal polypoidal lesions, often in connection with an abnormal choroidal
vascular network. In RAP, typical retino-retinal anastomosis can be identified,
in particular in areas with pigment epithelial detachment. Optical coherence
tomography (OCT) can complement diagnostic testing. In cases of RAP, early
therapy initiation with intravitreal anti-VEGF is crucial for the prognosis of
visual acuity. PCV can exhibit spontaneous regression. In active disease,
photodynamic therapy (PDT) is efficient in the closure of PCV polyps. In
association with CNV, it makes sense to combine PDT and intravitreal anti-VEGF
medication. In spite of the initial increase in visual acuity, this state is
normally "only" stabilised in the long term. In patients with idiopathic
secondary CNV membranes (high myopia, post-inflammatory, post-traumatic changes
or in hereditary connective tissue diseases), small "classical" type 2 membranes 
are mostly involved. Hence, these are strictly speaking not directly rare
subtypes. Nevertheless, these patients are mostly younger, with less protracted
illness and limited available regeneration ability of the retinal pigment
epithelium (RPE): they may therefore differ favourably from the courses with
nAMD, with earlier inactivation and with fewer required anti-VEGF injections. CNV
with angioid streaks are a special case in this group. Unfortunately, these
lesions have a recurrent, protracted and, in the end, mostly frustrating course.

Publisher: Choroidale Neovaskularisationsmembranen (CNV) im Rahmen einer
neovaskulären altersassoziierten Makuladegeneration (nAMD) können in Typ-1-
(okkulte) und Typ-2- (klassische) Membranen unterteilt werden. Hiervon
abzugrenzen sind, wegen ihrer differierenden Morphologie und des teils
schlechteren Ansprechens, neovaskuläre „Sonderformen“ wie retinale angiomatöse
Proliferationen (RAP) oder die polypoidalen choroidalen Vaskulopathien (PCV).
Klinisch hinweisend sind chorioretinale Anastomosen, kräftige Exsudationen mit – 
für die PCV – serosanguinösen Pigmentepithelabhebungen (PED) und typischen
orangerotfarbenen Läsionen im papillomakulären Bündel. Die
Indocyaningrünangiografie (ICGA) stellt den diagnostischen Goldstandard für die
PCV dar und liefert wichtige Informationen auch bei den RAP. Die Polypen der PCV 
stellen sich hier frühzeitig als fokale Hyperfluoreszenz mit z. T. pulsierender
Füllung dar, häufig in Verbindung mit einem anormalen choroidalen Netzwerk. Über 
Arealen mit einer PED können bei RAP retinoretinale Anastomosen gut identifiziert
werden. Die Befunde der optischen Kohärenztomografie (OCT) ergänzen die
Diagnostik. Ein möglichst frühzeitiger und konsequenter Therapieansatz mit
intravitrealer Anti-VEGF-Gabe ist bei RAP für die Visusprognose entscheidend. PCV
können eine spontane Regression zeigen. Besteht Therapiebedarf, sprechen die
Polypen besser auf eine photodynamische Therapie (PDT) an. Bei assoziierter CNV
ist die Kombination aus PDT und intravitrealer Anti-VEGF-Gabe sinnvoll. Trotz
initialem Anstieg kann im Langzeitverlauf der Visus zumeist „nur“ stabilisiert
werden. Bei idiopathischen wie sekundären CNV-Membranen (Myopia magna,
postentzündlich, posttraumatisch oder im Rahmen hereditärer
Bindegewebserkrankungen) handelt es sich zumeist um kleine (klassische)
Typ-2-Membranen. Sie stellen streng genommen keine direkten Sonderformen dar.
Durch ein meist jüngeres Patientenalter, eine kürzere Erkrankungsdauer, eine
begrenzte Regenerationsfähigkeit des retinalen Pigmentepithels (RPE) können sie
sich jedoch günstig von der nAMD unterscheiden, mit rascher Inaktivierung sowie
einem insgesamt geringeren Anti-VEGF-Injektionsbedarf. Eine Sonderstellung
innerhalb dieser Gruppe nimmt die CNV bei Angioid Streaks ein. Diese ist leider
durch einen rezidivierenden, langwierigen und letztlich zumeist frustranen
Verlauf gekennzeichnet.
Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0042-123833 
PMID: 28282700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Beratertätigkeit, Referent der Firmen: Novartis, 
Bayer Health Care, Allergan, Alimera Sciences.


479. Nurs Philos. 2018 Apr;19(2). doi: 10.1111/nup.12169. Epub 2017 Feb 10.

Reconciling conceptualizations of relationships and person-centred care for older
people with cognitive impairment in acute care settings.

Rushton C(1), Edvardsson D(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing and Midwifery, College of Science, Health and Engineering,
La Trobe University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Austin Health, Northern Health Clinical Schools of Nursing, College of
Science, Health and Engineering, La Trobe University, Heidelberg, Victoria,
Australia.
(3)Department of Nursing, Umea University, Umea, Sweden.

Relationships are central to enacting person-centred care of the older person
with cognitive impairment. A fuller understanding of relationships and the role
they play facilitating wellness and preserving personhood is critical if we are
to unleash the productive potential of nursing research and person-centred care. 
In this article, we target the acute care setting because much of the work about 
relationships and older people with cognitive impairment has tended to focus on
relationships in long-term care. The acute care setting is characterized by
archetypal constraints which differentiate it from long-term care, in terms of
acuity and haste, task-orientated work patterns and influence from "the rule of
medicine," all of which can privilege particular types of relating. In this
article, we drew on existing conceptualizations of relationships from theory and 
practice by tapping in to the intellectual resources provided by nurse
researchers, the philosophy of Martin Buber and ANT scholars. This involved
recounting two examples of dyadic and networked relationships which were
re-interpreted using two complementary theoretical approaches to provide deeper
and more comprehensive conceptualizations of these relationships. By
re-presenting key tenets from the work of key scholars on the topic
relationships, we hope to hasten socialization of these ideas into nursing into
the acute care setting. First, by enabling nurses to reflect on how they might
work toward cultivating relationships that are more salutogenic and consistent
with the preservation of personhood. Second, by stimulating two distinct but
related lines of research enquiry which focus on dyadic and networked
relationships with the older person with cognitive impairment in the acute care
setting. We also hope to reconcile the schism that has emerged in the literature 
between preferred approaches to care of the older person with cognitive
impairment, that is person-centred care versus relationship-centred care by
arguing that these are complementary rather than mutually exclusive and can be
brought together in one theoretical framework acknowledging personhood as
relational in essence.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/nup.12169 
PMID: 28185398  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


480. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graph. 2018 Feb;24(2):1049-1062. doi:
10.1109/TVCG.2017.2657511. Epub 2017 Jan 24.

Context-Aware Computer Aided Inbetweening.

Yang W.

This paper presents a context-aware computer aided inbetweening (CACAI) technique
that interpolates planar strokes to generate inbetween frames from a given set of
key frames. The inbetweening is context-aware in the sense that not only the
stroke's shape but also the context (i.e., the neighborhood of a stroke) in which
a stroke appears are taken into account for the stroke correspondence and
interpolation. Given a pair of successive key frames, the CACAI automatically
constructs the stroke correspondence between them by exploiting the context
coherence between the corresponding strokes. Meanwhile, the construction
algorithm is able to incorporate the user's interaction with ease and allows the 
user more effective control over the correspondence process than existing stroke 
matching techniques. With a one-to-one stroke correspondence, the CACAI
interpolates the shape and context between the corresponding strokes for the
generation of intermediate frames. In the interpolation sequence, both the shape 
of individual strokes and the spatial layout between them are well retained such 
that the feature characteristics and visual appearance of the objects in the key 
frames can be fully preserved even when complex motions are involved in these
objects. We have developed a prototype system to demonstrate the ease of use and 
effectiveness of the CACAI.

DOI: 10.1109/TVCG.2017.2657511 
PMID: 28129177 


481. Int J Offender Ther Comp Criminol. 2018 May;62(6):1474-1487. doi:
10.1177/0306624X16684566. Epub 2017 Jan 23.

The Relation Between a Sense of Meaning in Life and Suicide Potential Among
Disadvantaged Adolescent Girls.

Aviad-Wilchek Y(1), Ne'eman-Haviv V(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Ariel University, Israel.

The study examines the influence of the sense of meaning in life, or its absence,
on the suicide potential of disadvantaged adolescent girls in Israel who reside
in boarding school ( n = 50) compared with adolescent girls in a rehabilitation
project ( n = 31), and between them and normative adolescent girls ( n = 128).
The research findings indicate a negative relation between meaning in life and
suicide potential, which exists only among the normative adolescent girls and the
disadvantaged adolescent girls residing in the boarding school. This relation
does not exist among the disadvantaged adolescent girls in the rehabilitation
project. The explanation for this unusual finding is, apparently, the early stage
of rehabilitation at which the adolescent girls are found. In conclusion, this
study joins previous studies that propose prevention, intervention, and therapy
programs based on increasing adolescent (disadvantaged and not disadvantaged)
strength factors by finding meaning to their lives.

DOI: 10.1177/0306624X16684566 
PMID: 28114876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Women Health. 2018 Jan;58(1):92-111. doi: 10.1080/03630242.2017.1282395. Epub
2017 Jan 17.

Maternal psychological distress during pregnancy does not increase the risk for
adverse birth outcomes.

Staneva AA(1), Morawska A(1), Bogossian F(2), Wittkowski A(3).

Author information: 
(1)a The School of Psychology , The University of Queensland , Brisbane ,
Queensland , Australia.
(2)b The School of Nursing, Midwifery and Social Work , The University of
Queensland , Brisbane , Queensland , Australia.
(3)c Department of Psychology , University of Manchester , Manchester , UK.

Maternal psychological distress during pregnancy is a potential risk factor for
various birth complications. This study aimed to explore psychological factors
associated with adverse birth outcomes. Symptoms of psychological distress,
individual characteristics, and medical complications were assessed at two time
points antenatally in 285 women from Australia and New Zealand; birth outcomes
were assessed postpartum, between January 2014 and September 2015. Hierarchical
multiple regression analyses were conducted to examine the relation of
psychological distress to adverse birth outcomes. Medical complications during
pregnancy, such as serious infections, placental problems and preeclampsia, and
antenatal cannabis use, were the factors most strongly associated with adverse
birth outcomes, accounting for 22 percent of the total variance (p < .001).
Symptoms of depression and/or anxiety, low social support, and low sense of
coherence were not associated with birth complications. In unadjusted analyses,
self-reported diagnosis of anxiety disorder during pregnancy and an orientation
toward a Regulator mothering style were associated with adverse birth outcomes;
however, after controlling for medical complications, these were no longer
associated. Our study results indicate that antenatal depressive and/or anxiety
symptoms were not independently associated with adverse birth outcomes, a
reassuring finding for women who are already psychologically vulnerable during
pregnancy.

DOI: 10.1080/03630242.2017.1282395 
PMID: 28095254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Int J Ment Health Nurs. 2018 Feb;27(1):138-146. doi: 10.1111/inm.12302. Epub 2017
Jan 5.

Effect of family sense of coherence on internalized stigma and health-related
quality of life among individuals with schizophrenia.

Hsiao CY(1), Lu HL(2), Tsai YF(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, College of Medical and Health Science, Asia University,
Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Jianan Psychiatric Center, Ministry of Health and Welfare, Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)School of Nursing, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan,
Taiwan.
(4)Department of Nursing, Chang Gung University of Science and Technology,
Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Keelung, Taiwan.

Health-related quality of life is an increasingly critical outcome of mental
healthcare, yet its disease-independent attributes, particularly family-focused
resilient indicators, for individuals with schizophrenia have not been explicitly
examined. The aim of this study was to explore the degree of health-related
quality of life and to examine the mediating effect of family sense of coherence 
on internalized stigma and health-related quality of life in individuals with
schizophrenia. A cross-sectional and correlational study design was used. A total
of 111 individuals with schizophrenia were enrolled from the in-patient
psychiatric rehabilitation services of two psychiatric hospitals in Taiwan.
Face-to-face structured interviews were applied to collect information. Data were
analyzed with descriptive statistics and multiple regression analyses. The
results indicated that affected individuals experienced impaired health-related
quality of life. Family sense of coherence partially mediated the relationship
between internalized stigma and health-related quality of life. This study
indicates that knowledge about the role of family sense of coherence in mental
health rehabilitation may assist mental healthcare professionals to provide
therapeutic interventions to address internalized stigma, thereby promoting
health-related quality of life in individuals living with schizophrenia.

© 2017 Australian College of Mental Health Nurses Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/inm.12302 
PMID: 28054432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Int J Occup Saf Ergon. 2018 Jun;24(2):233-239. doi:
10.1080/10803548.2016.1268869. Epub 2017 Jan 9.

Self-perceived mental well-being amongst Malaysian dentists.

Ab-Murat N(1), Mason L(2), Kadir RA(3), Yusoff N(4).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Community Oral Health and Clinical Prevention , University of 
Malaya , Malaysia.
(2)b Oral Health Division , Ministry of Health , Malaysia.
(3)c Faculty of Dentistry , Lincoln University College , Malaysia.
(4)d Department of Dental Public Health , The National University of Malaysia ,
Malaysia.

PURPOSE: To assess Malaysian dentists' perceptions of their mental well-being.
METHODS: A self-administered questionnaire was developed based on a conceptual
framework of mental health and well-being model. Two aspects were assessed,
namely the physiological (two domains) and the psychological (six domains).
Participants were asked to rate their experiences of the aforementioned aspects
using a 5-point Likert scale ranging from all the time to never.
RESULTS: The response rate was 81%. Most of the dentists (61.7%) perceived having
positive mental well-being. Under the physiological aspect, most respondents
reported that they were 'generally happy' (93.3%), but about 30% stated they were
'stressed physically and emotionally'. Of the six domains under the psychological
aspect, positive well-being was observed in the 'sense of coherence' and
'behavioural stress' domains. Participants who were above 40 years old, married
and had children reported having a more positive mental well-being when compared 
with their counterparts.
CONCLUSION: Overall, most Malaysian dentists perceived having a positive mental
well-being. It is crucial, however, to closely monitor and initiate early
interventions for those with negative symptoms to ensure the safe practice of
dentistry.

DOI: 10.1080/10803548.2016.1268869 
PMID: 28010176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Assessment. 2019 Jun;26(4):706-725. doi: 10.1177/1073191116683798. Epub 2016 Dec 
23.

Resilience Style Questionnaire: Development and Validation Among College Students
and Cardiac Patients in Hong Kong.

Mak WWS(1), Ng ISW(1), Wong CCY(1), Law RW(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

The present research aims to develop and validate a measure of resilience that
reflects the influence of Confucian philosophies and Chinese cultural lay
beliefs. Based on a representative sample of 1,419 college students from
universities and a clinical sample of 214 cardiac patients in Hong Kong,
reliability, construct validity, and criterion validity of the Resilience Style
Questionnaire (RSQ) were examined. A two-factor structure of the RSQ was explored
and validated in both samples. Results showed that the two factors of the RSQ
(i.e., perseverance and optimistic approach to life) were significantly
associated with a variety of mental health indicators in both samples.
Furthermore, the RSQ explained additional variances above and beyond those
explained by the Ego-Resiliency Scale, the Sense of Coherence Scale (SOC), and
the Connor-Davidson Resilience Scale in multiple mental health indicators among
college students and cardiac patients. These findings showed that the RSQ is a
reliable and valid tool in assessing resilience among Chinese and other groups
influenced by Confucianism.

DOI: 10.1177/1073191116683798 
PMID: 28006974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Int J Dent Hyg. 2018 Feb;16(1):103-113. doi: 10.1111/idh.12257. Epub 2016 Nov 9.

Workplace health in dental care - a salutogenic approach.

Lindmark U(1), Wagman P(2), Wåhlin C(3)(4), Rolander B(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Natural Sciences and Biomedicine, Centre for Oral Health, School
of Health and Welfare, Jönköping University, Jönköping, Sweden.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation, School of Health and Welfare, Jönköping
University, Jönköping, Sweden.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Occupational and
Environmental Medicine Center, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(4)Intervention and Implementation Research Unit, Karolinska Institutet,
Linköping, Sweden.
(5)Futurum, Academy for Health and Care, Jönköping County Council, Jönköping,
Sweden.
(6)Department of Behavioral Science and Social Work, School of Health and
Welfare, Jönköping University, Jönköping, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose was to explore self-reported psychosocial health and work 
environments among different dental occupations and workplaces from a salutogenic
perspective. A further purpose was to analyse possible associations between three
salutogenic measurements: The Sense of Coherence questionnaire (SOC), the
Salutogenic Health Indicator Scale (SHIS) and the Work Experience Measurement
Scale (WEMS).
METHODS: Employees in the Public Dental Service in a Swedish county council (n = 
486) were invited to respond to a self-reported web survey including
demographics, work-related factors, the SOC, the SHIS and the WEMS.
RESULTS: This study showed positive associations between employee characteristics
and self-reported overall psychosocial health as well as experienced work
environment. Autonomy was reported more among men than women (P < 0.000) and to a
higher degree by dentists and dental hygienists than dental nurses (P < 0.000).
Meaningfulness, happiness, job satisfaction, autonomy and positive to
reorganization were reported by personnels aged less than 40 years (P ≤ 0.047).
Clinical coordinators reported significant better health (SOC, SHIS) and
experienced more autonomy, better management and more positive to reorganization 
than other dental professions. Dental hygienists and nurses experienced less time
pressure than dentists (P ≤ 0.007). Better health and positive work experiences
were also seen in smaller clinics (P ≤ 0.29).
CONCLUSION: Dental professionals reported a high degree of overall psychosocial
health as well as a positive work experience. Some variations could be seen
between employee characteristics such as gender, years in dental care,
professionals, managing position and workplace size. Identify resources and
processes at each workplace are important and should be included in the
employee's/employers dialogue.

© 2016 The Authors. International Journal of Dental Hygiene Published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/idh.12257 
PMCID: PMC5811775
PMID: 27860378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Retin Cases Brief Rep. 2018 Summer;12(3):207-211. doi:
10.1097/ICB.0000000000000465.

SD-OCT AND MICROPERIMETRIC CORRELATED CHANGES IN PROGRESSIVE X-LINKED
RETINOSCHISIS AFTER VITRECTOMY: A CASE REPORT.

Sborgia L(1), Recchimurzo N(1), Niro A(1), Sborgia G(1), Furino C(1), Boscia
F(2), Alessio G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Science, Neuroscience and Sense Organs, University of
Bari, Bari, Italy.
(2)Eye Clinic, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy.

PURPOSE: To report optical coherence tomography and microperimetric correlated
changes in a case of bilateral foveal schisis in progressive X-linked
retinoschisis (XLRS) treated with vitrectomy, inner limiting membrane (ILM)
peeling, and air tamponade.
METHODS: One case report.
RESULTS: An 18-year-old boy with bilateral foveal schisis in progressive XLRS
underwent vitrectomy, ILM peeling and air tamponade in both eyes. At baseline and
follow-up (1 month in right eye, 6 months in left eye), visual acuity test,
optical coherence tomography, retinal sensitivity map, and fixation stability
study were performed. At the end of follow-up, in both eyes, the largest foveal
schisis cavities resolved, central macular thickness and volume on optical
coherence tomography decreased, and visual acuity improved. In right eye, the
mean retinal sensitivity is worsened after 1 month from surgery and conversely
central macular sensitivity improved; in left eye, retinal sensitivity improved
overall after 6 months from surgery; fixation became more stable in both eyes.
There were no adverse events.
CONCLUSION: Retinal sensitivity and fixation behavior analysis could be a
complementary tool respect in addition to visual acuity test and optical
coherence tomography to investigate the efficacy of vitrectomy with ILM in
progressive X-linked foveal schisis to prevent functional impairment before it
happens.

DOI: 10.1097/ICB.0000000000000465 
PMID: 27798534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Aging Health. 2018 Jan;30(1):3-26. doi: 10.1177/0898264316665933. Epub 2016 Aug
25.

Neighborhood Disorder, Perceived Social Cohesion, and Social Participation Among 
Older Americans: Findings From the National Health & Aging Trends Study.

Latham K(1), Clarke PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, USA.
(2)2 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA.

OBJECTIVE: This research explores whether physical neighborhood disorder or
perceived social cohesion is associated with participation in social activities
among older Americans (age 65+).
METHOD: Using the first wave of the National Health & Aging Trends Study (NHATS; 
N = 6,383), a series of logistic regression models were created to assess the
odds of participation.
RESULTS: Low social cohesion was associated with decreased odds of visiting
friends and family (odds ratio [OR] = 0.65; 95% confidence interval [CI] = [0.52,
0.82]) and participating in organizations (OR = 0.68; 95% CI = [0.53, 0.88]).
Presence of neighborhood disorder was associated with decreased odds of visiting 
friends and family (OR = 0.62; 95% CI = [0.47, 0.82]), participating in
organizations (OR = 0.66; 95% CI = [0.48, 0.89]), and going out for enjoyment (OR
= 0.68; 95% CI = [0.53, 0.86]). Physical capacity and activity value moderated
the relationship between neighborhood disorder/cohesion and attending religious
services.
DISCUSSION: Improving neighborhood disorder and social cohesion may increase
social participation among older adults.

DOI: 10.1177/0898264316665933 
PMID: 27566464  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Nurs Ethics. 2018 Aug;25(5):571-579. doi: 10.1177/0969733016660882. Epub 2016 Aug
16.

Relationships among moral distress, sense of coherence, and job satisfaction.

Ando M(1), Kawano M(2).

Author information: 
(1)St. Mary's College, Japan.
(2)Arima Kogen Hospital, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Since moral distress affects psychological aspects of psychiatric
nurses, it is an important theme. Previous studies showed relationships between
moral distress and job satisfaction; however, there are few studies which
investigate relationships between moral distress and other effective variables
and then we highlighted relationships among these variables.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to (1) examine relationships among moral distress,
sense of coherence, mental health, and job satisfaction and (2) clarify the most 
predictive variable to job satisfaction.
RESEARCH DESIGN: This study is a cross-sectional study. Participants were 130
psychiatric nurses in a hospital in Japan. They completed the Moral Distress
Scale for Psychiatric nurses (Unethical conduct, Low staffing, and Acquiescence
to patients' rights violations), the sense of coherence scale (Comprehensibility,
Manageability, and Meaning), the General Health Questionnaire, and the Job
Satisfaction scale. Ethical consideration: This study was approved by the ethical
board of St Mary's College. Nurses participated voluntarily and were anonymous.
RESULTS: Results showed that subscales of the Moral Distress Scale for
Psychiatric nurses negatively correlated to the sense of coherence and the Job
Satisfaction. A multiple regression analysis showed that "Acquiescence to
patients' rights violations" of the Moral Distress Scale for Psychiatric nurses
and "Meaning" of the sense of coherence influenced the Job Satisfaction much more
than other variables. These two variables were correlated to job satisfaction
scale, and other variables without them did not significantly correlate to job
satisfaction scale.
DISCUSSION: These results suggest that moral distress negatively related to sense
of coherence and job satisfaction, a subscale of the Moral Distress Scale for
Psychiatric nurses and that of the sense of coherence affected the job
satisfaction the most.
CONCLUSION: Decreasing of acquiescence to patients' rights violations and finding
meaning in nursing may improve job satisfaction.

DOI: 10.1177/0969733016660882 
PMID: 27531818  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Glob Health Promot. 2018 Mar;25(1):33-42. doi: 10.1177/1757975916639870. Epub
2016 Jun 30.

Individual, social-environmental, and physical-environmental factors that
underlie sense of coherence in Dutch adults.

Swan E(1), Bouwman L(1), Hiddink GJ(2), Aarts N(2)(3), Koelen M(1).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Social Sciences, Health and Society Group, Wageningen
University and Research Centre, the Netherlands.
(2)2. Department of Social Sciences, Strategic Communication Group, Wageningen
University and Research Centre, the Netherlands.
(3)3. ASCor (Amsterdam School for Communication Research), University of
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Antonovsky's salutogenesis is a theoretical perspective on health development
that explores physical, mental, and social factors that contribute to a 'healthy 
life orientation' and also a theoretical approach to behavior change. Previous
studies applying salutogenesis show that a high sense of coherence (SOC), a
composite measure from salutogenesis indicating one's capacity to cope with
stress, is associated with a healthy life orientation and lifestyle behaviors,
including healthy eating patterns. However, limited evidence exists on the
factors that underlie SOC, which could be used to strengthen this capacity as a
means to enable healthier eating. Dutch adults ( N = 781) participated in a
cross-sectional study examining the relationship between SOC and a set of
individual, social-environmental, and physical-environmental factors. The main
findings indicate that high SOC was associated with a diverse set of factors
including lower doctor-oriented health locus of control; higher satisfaction with
weight; higher perceived levels of neighborhood collective efficacy; higher
situational self-efficacy for healthy eating; lower social discouragement for
healthy eating; and higher neighborhood affordability, accessibility and
availability of healthy foods. These findings can inform the design of nutrition 
interventions that target these factors that strengthen SOC and provide the
building blocks for a healthier life orientation.

DOI: 10.1177/1757975916639870 
PMID: 27364776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Health Psychol. 2019 Mar;24(3):327-336. doi: 10.1177/1359105316651332. Epub
2016 Jun 1.

Leventhal's common-sense model and asthma control: Do illness representations
predict success of an asthma rehabilitation?

Achstetter LI(1), Schultz K(2), Faller H(1), Schuler M(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 University of Würzburg, Germany.
(2)2 Bad Reichenhall Clinic, Germany.

This study investigates whether illness representations predict changes in asthma
control or vice versa. Illness perceptions and asthma control were assessed in N 
= 113 asthma patients at the begin/end of an inpatient rehabilitation. Bivariate 
cross-lagged panel analyses showed that the illness representation dimensions
Personal control, Consequences, Coherence, and Emotional representation predicted
the change in asthma control, but asthma control did not predict illness
representations. In multiple regression analyses with covariates, Personal
control still predicted the change in asthma control. Illness beliefs assessed at
the beginning of an intervention might help to identify patients with lower
probability of treatment success.

DOI: 10.1177/1359105316651332 
PMID: 27257266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Autism Dev Disord. 2018 Apr;48(4):1397-1408. doi: 10.1007/s10803-016-2724-6.

Evidence of Reduced Global Processing in Autism Spectrum Disorder.

Booth RDL(1)(2), Happé FGE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuropsychiatry Section, Institute of Child Health,
University College London, 30 Guilford Street, London, WC1N 1EH, UK.
rhonda.booth@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)MRC Social, Genetic & Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, Denmark Hill,
London, SE5 8AF, UK. rhonda.booth@ucl.ac.uk.
(3)MRC Social, Genetic & Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, Denmark Hill,
London, SE5 8AF, UK.

Frith's original notion of 'weak central coherence' suggested that increased
local processing in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) resulted from reduced global
processing. More recent accounts have emphasised superior local perception and
suggested intact global integration. However, tasks often place local and global 
processing in direct trade-off, making it difficult to determine whether group
differences reflect reduced global processing, increased local processing, or
both. We present two measures of global integration in which poor performance
could not reflect increased local processing. ASD participants were slower to
identify fragmented figures and less sensitive to global geometric impossibility 
than IQ-matched controls. These findings suggest that reduced global integration 
comprises one important facet of weak central coherence in ASD.

DOI: 10.1007/s10803-016-2724-6 
PMCID: PMC5861162
PMID: 26864159  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Interpers Violence. 2018 Jun;33(12):1931-1957. doi: 10.1177/0886260515621065.
Epub 2015 Dec 17.

Posttraumatic Stress Symptoms, Burn-Out, and Compassion Satisfaction Among Body
Handlers: The Mediating Role of Sense of Coherence and Spirituality at Workplace.

Zerach G(1), Levin Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Ariel University, Ariel, Israel.

This study assessed posttraumatic stress symptoms (PTSS), burn-out (BO), and
compassion satisfaction (CS) among Israeli body handlers. We aimed to explore
differences between two groups of Orthodox Jewish male volunteers: the "ZAKA"
body handlers (ZAs: n = 102), and a comparison group of charity workers (CWs: n =
101). Furthermore, we assessed the contribution of two potential resilience
buffers-sense of coherence (SOC) and spirituality at the workplace (SAW)-to PTSS,
BO, and CS among these volunteers via self-report measures. Surprisingly, results
show that ZAs reported significantly lower levels of PTSS and BO as compared with
CWs. ZAs also reported significantly higher levels of CS as compared with CWs.
Importantly, SOC mediated the link between groups and PTSS and BO. Both SOC and
SAW mediated the link between groups and CS. These findings suggest that "ZAKA"
body handlers demonstrate substantial resilience following repeated exposure to
death and atrocities. To reduce work-related psychological distress and improve
CS, SOC and SAW should be taken into account in the process of recruitment and
training of body handlers.

DOI: 10.1177/0886260515621065 
PMID: 26685213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Nurs Crit Care. 2018 Nov;23(6):308-315. doi: 10.1111/nicc.12168. Epub 2015 Feb
18.

Follow-up visit in an ICU: receiving a sense of coherence.

Engström Å(1), Rogmalm K(2), Marklund L(3), Wälivaara BM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Associate Professor, Division of Nursing, Department of Health Science, Luleå 
University of Technology, Luleå, Sweden.
(2)Piteå Hospial, Piteå, Sweden.
(3)Medical Department, Piteå Hospital, Piteå, Sweden.
(4)Senior Lecturer, Division of Nursing, Department of Health Science, Luleå
University of Technology, Luleå, Sweden.

AIM: To describe patients' experiences of a follow-up visit to an intensive care 
unit (ICU) after being critically ill and nursed there.
BACKGROUND: Knowledge about the follow-up visit needs to be developed, with the
previously critically ill patient in focus.
DESIGN: Qualitative descriptive.
METHOD: Semi-structured interviews were conducted with nine patients and analysed
using qualitative content analysis. The data collection occurred during spring
2014.
FINDINGS: During the follow-up visits in ICU, the relatives, the patient diary,
and those who took part in the care contribute to fill memory gaps to create a
picture and an explanation of the care period.
CONCLUSION: The follow-up visit is an important tool in the patients' struggle to
create a context and coherence from a missing or unreal time. The patient diary
is essential to subsequently be able to relate to the period of care.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: The follow-up visit, together with a personal
diary, after an ICU stay could be seen as significant for strengthening the
patients' feeling of coherence and better health.

© 2015 British Association of Critical Care Nurses.

DOI: 10.1111/nicc.12168 
PMID: 25690677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]




